   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Abolitionism in the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Collection box for Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society. Circa 1850.
                             Slavery
   COLLECTIE TROPENMUSEUM IJzeren voetring voor gevangenen TMnr
   3912-475.jpg
   Contemporary
     * Child labour
     * Conscription
     * Debt
     * Forced marriage
          + Bride-buying
          + Wife selling
     * Forced prostitution
     * Human trafficking
     * Peonage
     * Penal labour
     * Sexual slavery

   Historic

   Antiquity

     * Ancient Rome
     * Babylonia
     * Ancient Greece

   Middle Ages

     * Atlantic slave trade
          + Middle Passage
     * Arab slave trade
          + Saqaliba
          + Mamluk
     * Aztec
     * Blackbirding
     * Byzantine Empire
     * Coolie
     * Corvée labor
     * Field slaves in the United States
     * House slaves
     * Kholop
     * Medieval Europe
     * Panyarring
     * Thrall
     * Serfs
          + History
          + Russia
     * Slave raiding

   Naval

     * Galley slave
     * Impressment
     * Pirates
     * Shanghaiing
     * Slave ship

   By country or region

   Africa

     * Contemporary Africa
     * Slavery on the Barbary Coast
     * Barbary slave trade
     * Slave Coast
     * Angola
     * Chad
     * Ethiopia
     * Mali
     * Mauritania
     * Niger
     * Somalia
     * South Africa
     * Sudan
     * Seychelles

   Americas

     * Americas indigenous
          + U.S. Natives
     * Brazil
          + Lei Áurea
     * Canada
     * Caribbean
          + Barbados
          + Code Noir
     * Cuba
     * Haiti
          + revolt
          + Restavec
     * Latin America
     * Puerto Rico
     * Trinidad
     * United States
          + colonial
          + maps
          + female
          + partus
               o
                    # Penal labor in the United States
          + Slave codes
          + interregional
          + Human Trafficking
     * Virgin Islands

   Asia

     * Bhutan
     * China
          + Booi Aha
          + Laogai
     * India
          + Debt bondage
          + Chukri System
     * Japan
          + comfort women
     * North Korea
     * Vietnam

   Europe

     * Sex trafficking in Europe
     * British Isles
     * Denmark
     * Germany in World War II
     * Holland
     * Poland
     * Portugal
     * Romania
     * Russia
     * Spain
          + colonies
     * Sweden

   Middle East and North Africa

     * Iran
     * Libya
     * Ottoman Empire

   Religion
     * Bible
     * Christianity
     * Islam
     * Judaism

   Opposition and resistance
     * Timeline
     * Abolitionism
          + U.K.
          + U.S.
     * Anti-Slavery International
     * Blockade of Africa
          + U.K.
          + U.S.
     * Compensated emancipation
     * Freedman
          + manumission
     * Freedom suit
     * Abolitionists
     * Slave Power
     * Underground Railroad
          + songs
     * Slave rebellion
     * Slave Trade Acts
     * International law

   Related
     * Common law
     * Indentured servant
     * Unfree labour
     * Fugitive slaves
          + laws
          + Great Dismal Swamp maroons
     * List of slaves
          + owners
     * Slave narrative
          + films
          + songs
     * Slave name
     * Slave Route Project
     * Treatment in U.S.
          + breeding
          + court cases
          + Washington
          + Jefferson
          + Adams
          + Lincoln
          + 40 acres
          + Freedmen's Bureau
          + bit
     * Wage slavery
     * Emancipation Day

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Abolitionism in the United States was the movement prior to the
   American Civil War to end slavery, whether formal or informal, in the
   United States.

   In Western Europe and the Americas, abolitionism was a historical
   movement to end the African slave trade and set slaves free. Later, in
   the 17th century, English Quakers and evangelical religious groups
   condemned slavery (by then applied mostly to Africans) as un-Christian;
   in the 18th century, abolition was part of the message of the First
   Great Awakening in the Thirteen Colonies; and in the same period,
   rationalist thinkers of the Enlightenment criticized it for violating
   the rights of man. James Edward Oglethorpe was among the first to
   articulate the Enlightenment case against slavery, banning it in the
   Province of Georgia on humanistic grounds, arguing against it in
   Parliament, and eventually encouraging his friends Granville Sharp and
   Hannah More to vigorously pursue the cause. Soon after his death in
   1785, they joined with William Wilberforce and others in forming the
   Clapham Sect.^[1] Though anti-slavery sentiments were widespread by the
   late 18th century, the colonies and emerging nations that used slave
   labor continued to do so, including the South of the United States.

   After the American Revolution established the United States, northern
   states, beginning with Pennsylvania in 1780, passed legislation during
   the next two decades abolishing slavery, sometimes by gradual
   emancipation. Massachusetts ratified a constitution that declared all
   men equal; freedom suits challenging slavery based on this principle
   brought an end to slavery in the state. In other states, such as
   Virginia, similar declarations of rights were interpreted by the courts
   not applicable to Africans. During the following decades, the
   abolitionist movement grew in northern states, and Congress regulated
   the expansion of slavery in new states admitted to the union.

   Britain banned the importation of African slaves in its colonies in
   1807 and abolished slavery in the British Empire in 1833. The United
   States criminalized the international slave trade in 1808 and abolished
   slavery in 1865 as a result of the American Civil War.

   The historian James M. McPherson defines an abolitionist "as one who
   before the Civil War had agitated for the immediate, unconditional, and
   total abolition of slavery in the United States." He does not include
   antislavery activists such as Abraham Lincoln or the Republican Party,
   which called for the gradual ending of slavery.^[2]

Contents

     * 1 The beginnings
     * 2 Calls for abolition
     * 3 Abolition in the North
     * 4 Manumission by Southern owners
     * 5 Western territories
     * 6 Colonization and the founding of Liberia
     * 7 Emigration
     * 8 Religion and morality
     * 9 Garrison and immediate emancipation
     * 10 Uncle Tom's Cabin
     * 11 American Catholics
     * 12 Abolitionist women
     * 13 Progress of abolition in the United States
          + 13.1 To 1804
          + 13.2 South
          + 13.3 Immediate abolition
          + 13.4 1850s
               o 13.4.1 Compromise of 1850
               o 13.4.2 Republican Party
               o 13.4.3 John Brown
               o 13.4.4 American Civil War
     * 14 See also
     * 15 References
     * 16 Further reading
     * 17 External links

The beginnings[edit]

   Uncle Tom's Cabin inflamed public opinion in the North and in Britain
   against the personified evils of slavery.

   The first attempts to end slavery in the British/American colonies came
   from Thomas Jefferson and some of his contemporaries. Despite the fact
   that Jefferson was a lifelong slaveholder, he included strong
   anti-slavery language in the original draft of the Declaration of
   Independence, but other delegates took it out.^[3] Benjamin Franklin,
   also a slaveholder for most of his life, was a leading member of the
   Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery, the first recognized
   organization for abolitionists in the United States.^[4] Following the
   Revolutionary War, Northern states abolished slavery, beginning with
   the 1777 constitution of Vermont, followed by Pennsylvania's gradual
   emancipation act in 1780. Other states with more of an economic
   interest in slaves, such as New York and New Jersey, also passed
   gradual emancipation laws, but by 1804, all the northern states had
   abolished it. Some slaves continued in servitude for two more decades
   but most were freed.

   Also in the postwar years, individual slaveholders, particularly in the
   Upper South, manumitted slaves, sometimes in their wills. Many noted
   they had been moved by the revolutionary ideals of the equality of men.
   The number of free blacks as a proportion of the black population
   increased from less than one percent to nearly ten percent from 1790 to
   1810 in the Upper South as a result of these actions.

   As President, on March 2, 1807, Jefferson signed the Act Prohibiting
   Importation of Slaves and it took effect in 1808, which was the
   earliest allowed under the Constitution. In 1820 he privately supported
   the Missouri Compromise, believing it would help to end
   slavery,^[3]^[5] but his views on slavery were complicated, and
   possibly contradictory ^[6]. His will freed only a small fraction of
   Monticello's slaves ^[7]
   William Lloyd Garrison, founder of the American Anti-Slavery Society

   In the 1850s in the fifteen states constituting the American South,
   slavery was legal. While it was fading away in the cities and border
   states, it remained strong in plantation areas that grew cash crops
   such as cotton, sugar, rice, tobacco or hemp. By the 1860 United States
   Census, the slave population in the United States had grown to four
   million.^[8] American abolitionism was based in the North, and white
   Southerners alleged it fostered slave rebellion.

   The white abolitionist movement in the North was led by social
   reformers, especially William Lloyd Garrison, founder of the American
   Anti-Slavery Society; writers such as John Greenleaf Whittier and
   Harriet Beecher Stowe. Black activists included former slaves such as
   Frederick Douglass; and free blacks such as the brothers Charles Henry
   Langston and John Mercer Langston, who helped found the Ohio
   Anti-Slavery Society.^[9] Some abolitionists said that slavery was
   criminal and a sin; they also criticized slave owners of using black
   women as concubines and taking sexual advantage of them.^[10]

   The Republican Party wanted to achieve the gradual extinction of
   slavery by market forces, for its members believed that free labor was
   superior to slave labor. Southern leaders said the Republican policy of
   blocking the expansion of slavery into the West made them second-class
   citizens, and challenged their autonomy. With the 1860 presidential
   victory of Abraham Lincoln, seven Deep South states whose economy was
   based on cotton and slavery decided to secede and form a new nation.
   The American Civil War broke out in April 1861 with the firing on Fort
   Sumter in South Carolina. When Lincoln called for troops to suppress
   the rebellion, four more slave states seceded. In 1863, Lincoln issued
   the Emancipation Proclamation, which freed slaves held in the
   Confederate States; all the border states (except Delaware) began their
   own emancipation programs. Thousands of slaves escaped to freedom
   behind Union Army lines, and in 1863 many men started serving as the
   United States Colored Troops. The 13th Amendment to the U.S.
   Constitution took effect in December 1865 and finally ended slavery
   throughout the United States. It also abolished slavery among the
   Indian tribes.

Calls for abolition[edit]

   The first American call to abolish slavery came in April 1688 when
   Quakers in Germantown, Pennsylvania wrote a two-page condemnation of
   the practice and sent it to the governing bodies of their Quaker
   church, the Society of Friends. The Quaker establishment never took
   action. The 1688 Germantown Quaker Petition Against Slavery was an
   unusually early, clear and forceful argument against slavery and
   initiated the spirit that finally led to the end of slavery in the
   Society of Friends (1776) and in the state of Pennsylvania (1780).

   Slavery was banned in the Province of Georgia soon after its founding
   in 1733. The colony’s founder, James Edward Oglethorpe, fended off
   repeated attempts by South Carolina merchants and land speculators to
   introduce slavery to the colony. In 1739, he wrote to the Georgia
   Trustees urging them to hold firm: “If we allow slaves we act against
   the very principles by which we associated together, which was to
   relieve the distresses. Whereas, now we should occasion the misery of
   thousands in Africa, by setting men upon using arts to buy and bring
   into perpetual slavery the poor people who now live there free.” The
   struggle between Georgia and South Carolina led to the first debates in
   Parliament over the issue of slavery, occurring between 1740 and
   1742.^[11]
   Thomas Paine (1737–1805), whose 1775 article "African Slavery in
   America" was one of the first article the United States which advocated
   abolishing slavery and freeing the slaves.

   The Society for the Relief of Free Negroes Unlawfully Held in Bondage
   was the first American abolition society, formed 14 April 1775, in
   Philadelphia, primarily by Quakers. The society suspended operations
   during the Revolutionary war and was reorganized in 1784, with Benjamin
   Franklin as its first president.^[12] Rhode Island Quakers, associated
   with Moses Brown, were among the first in America to free slaves.
   Benjamin Rush was another leader, as were many Quakers. John Woolman
   gave up most of his business in 1756 to devote himself to campaigning
   against slavery along with other Quakers.^[13] One of the first
   articles advocating the emancipation of slaves and the abolition of
   slavery was written by Thomas Paine. Titled "African Slavery in
   America", it appeared on 8 March 1775 in the Postscript to the
   Pennsylvania Journal and Weekly Advertiser, more popularly known as The
   Pennsylvania Magazine, or American Museum.^[14]

Abolition in the North[edit]

   Beginning with Vermont in 1777, most states north of the Ohio River and
   the Mason-Dixon Line abolished slavery. Slavery in Massachusetts was
   abolished by the judiciary; since the constitution (also adopted in
   1780) declared all men to have rights, slavery was unenforceable.
   Emancipation in many free states was gradual; those who were slaves
   often remained slaves, but children of slaves were born free.
   Transition arrangements were made, partially to prevent abuses. New
   York and Pennsylvania, for example, still listed a few slaves in their
   1840 census returns, and a small number of black slaves (12) were held
   in New Jersey in 1860 as "perpetual apprentices".^[15]^[16]

   At the United States Constitutional Convention of 1787, delegates
   debated over slavery, finally agreeing to protect the international
   slave trade for 20 years by not regulating it before 1808. By that
   time, all the states had passed individual laws abolishing or severely
   limiting the international buying or selling of slaves.^[17] Through
   the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, the Congress of the Confederation
   prohibited slavery in the territories northwest of the Ohio River. The
   importation of slaves into the United States was officially banned on 1
   January 1808.^[18] No action was taken on the nation's internal
   domestic slave trade.
   John Jay (1745–1829), who founded the New York Manumission Society in
   1785.

   The principal organized bodies to advocate this reform were the
   Pennsylvania Abolition Society and the New York Manumission Society.
   The latter was headed by powerful politicians: John Jay, Alexander
   Hamilton, later Federalists, and Aaron Burr, later the
   Democratic-Republican Vice-President of the United States. New York did
   enact a bill in 1799 that ended slavery over time^[19]^[20]

   In 1806, President Thomas Jefferson denounced the international slave
   trade and called for a law to make it a crime. He told Congress in his
   1806 annual message, such a law was needed to "withdraw the citizens of
   the United States from all further participation in those violations of
   human rights...which the morality, the reputation, and the best of our
   country have long been eager to proscribe."^[21] Congress in 1807 did
   outlaw the international slave trade, effective January 1, 1808. The
   result was a reduction of over 90% in the volume of the slave trade
   from Africa to the U.S. About 1000 slaves a year were illegally brought
   into the United States.^[22]

Manumission by Southern owners[edit]

   After 1776, Quaker and Moravian advocates helped persuade numerous
   slaveholders in the Upper South to free their slaves. Manumissions
   increased for nearly two decades. Many individual acts of manumission
   freed thousands of slaves. Slaveholders freed slaves in such number
   that the percentage of free Negroes in the Upper South increased
   sharply from one to ten percent, with most of that increase in
   Virginia, Maryland and Delaware. By 1810 three-quarters of blacks in
   Delaware were free. The most notable of men offering manumission was
   Robert Carter III of Virginia, who freed more than 450 people by "Deed
   of Gift", filed in 1791. This number was more slaves than any single
   American had freed or would ever free.^[23] Often slaveholders came to
   their decisions by their own struggles in the Revolution; their wills
   and deeds frequently cited language about the equality of men
   supporting their manumissions. Slaveholders were also encouraged to do
   so because the economics of the area was changing. They were shifting
   from labor-intensive tobacco culture to mixed-crop cultivation and did
   not need as many slaves.^[24]

   The free black families began to thrive, together with African
   Americans free before the Revolution. By 1860, in Delaware 91.7 percent
   of the blacks were free, and 49.7 percent of those in Maryland. Such
   early free families often formed the core of artisans, professionals,
   preachers and teachers in future generations.^[24]

Western territories[edit]

   During the Congressional debate on the 1820 Tallmadge Amendment, which
   sought to limit slavery in Missouri as it became a state, Rufus King
   declared that "laws or compacts imposing any such condition [slavery]
   upon any human being are absolutely void, because contrary to the law
   of nature, which is the law of God, by which he makes his ways known to
   man, and is paramount to all human control." The amendment failed and
   Missouri became a slave state. According to the historian David Brion
   Davis, this may have been the first time in the world that a political
   leader openly attacked slavery's perceived legality in such a radical
   manner.

   Beginning in the 1830s, the U.S. Postmaster General refused to allow
   the mails to carry abolition pamphlets to the South.^[25] Northern
   teachers suspected of abolitionism were expelled from the South, and
   abolitionist literature was banned. Southerners rejected the denials of
   Republicans that they were abolitionists. They pointed to John Brown's
   attempt in 1859 to start a slave uprising as proof that multiple
   Northern conspiracies were afoot to ignite slave rebellions. Although
   some abolitionists did call for slave revolts, no evidence of any other
   Brown-like conspiracy has been discovered.^[26] The North felt
   threatened as well, for as Eric Foner concludes, "Northerners came to
   view slavery as the very antithesis of the good society, as well as a
   threat to their own fundamental values and interests".^[27] The famous,
   "fiery" Abolitionist, Abby Kelley Foster, from Massachusetts, was
   considered an "ultra" abolitionist who believed in full civil rights
   for all black people. She held to the views that the freed slaves would
   colonize Liberia. Parts of the anti-slavery movement became known as
   "Abby Kellyism". She recruited Susan B Anthony and Lucy Stone to the
   movement. Effingham Capron, a cotton and textile scion, who attended
   the Quaker meeting where Abby Kelley Foster and her family were
   members, became a prominent abolitionist at the local, state, and
   national levels.^[28] The local anti-slavery society at Uxbridge had
   over one quarter of the town's population as members.^[28]

Colonization and the founding of Liberia[edit]

   Henry Clay (1777–1852), one of the three founders of the American
   Colonization Society.

   In the early part of the 19th century, a variety of organizations were
   established that advocated relocation of black people from the United
   States to places where they would enjoy greater freedom; some endorsed
   colonization, while others advocated emigration. During the 1820s and
   1830s the American Colonization Society (A.C.S.) was the primary
   vehicle for proposals to "return" black Americans to freedom in Africa,
   regardless of whether they were native-born in the United States. It
   had broad support nationwide among white people, including prominent
   leaders such as Abraham Lincoln,^[29] Henry Clay and James Monroe, who
   considered this preferable to emancipation. Clay said that due to

     "unconquerable prejudice resulting from their color, they [the
     blacks] never could amalgamate with the free whites of this country.
     It was desirable, therefore, as it respected them, and the residue
     of the population of the country, to drain them off".^[30]

   Many African Americans opposed colonization, and simply wanted to be
   given the rights of free citizens in the United States. One notable
   opponent of such plans was the wealthy free black abolitionist James
   Forten of Philadelphia.

   After attempts to plant small settlements on the coast of West Africa,
   the A.C.S. established the colony of Liberia in 1821–22. Over the next
   four decades, it assisted thousands of former slaves and free black
   people to move there from the United States. The disease environment
   they encountered was extreme, and most of the migrants died fairly
   quickly. Enough survived to declare independence in 1847. American
   support for colonization waned gradually through the 1840s and 1850s,
   largely because of the efforts of abolitionists to promote emancipation
   of slaves and granting of United States citizenship. The
   Americo-Liberians established an elite who ruled Liberia continuously
   until the military coup of 1980.^[31]

Emigration[edit]

   The emigrationist tradition dated to the Revolutionary War era.
   Initially, the thought was that free African Americans would want to
   emigrate to Africa, but over time other ideas became popular. After
   Haiti became independent, it tried to recruit African Americans to
   migrate there after it re-established trade relations with the United
   States. The Haitian Union was the name of a group formed to promote
   relations between the countries.^[32]

   After riots against blacks in Cincinnati, its Black community sponsored
   founding the Wilberforce Colony, an initially successful settlement of
   African-American immigrants to Canada. The colony was one of the first
   such independent political entities. It lasted for a number of decades
   and provided a destination for about 200 black families emigrating from
   a number of locations in the United States.^[32]

Religion and morality[edit]

   The Second Great Awakening of the 1820s and 1830s in religion inspired
   groups that undertook many types of social reform. For some that
   included the immediate abolition of slavery as they considered it
   sinful to hold slaves as well as to tolerate slavery. "Abolitionist"
   had several meanings at the time. The followers of William Lloyd
   Garrison, including Wendell Phillips and Frederick Douglass, demanded
   the "immediate abolition of slavery", hence the name. A more pragmatic
   group of abolitionists, such as Theodore Weld and Arthur Tappan, wanted
   immediate action, but were willing to support a program of gradual
   emancipation, with a long intermediate stage.

   "Antislavery men", such as John Quincy Adams, did not call slavery a
   sin. They called it an evil feature of society as a whole. They did
   what they could to limit slavery and end it where possible, but were
   not part of any abolitionist group. For example, in 1841 Adams
   represented the Amistad African slaves in the Supreme Court of the
   United States and argued that they should be set free.^[33] In the last
   years before the war, "antislavery" could refer to the Northern
   majority, such as Abraham Lincoln, who opposed expansion of slavery or
   its influence, as by the Kansas-Nebraska Act or the Fugitive Slave Act.
   Many Southerners called all these abolitionists, without distinguishing
   them from the Garrisonians.

   Historian James Stewart (1976) explains the abolitionists' deep
   beliefs: "All people were equal in God's sight; the souls of black
   folks were as valuable as those of whites; for one of God's children to
   enslave another was a violation of the Higher Law, even if it was
   sanctioned by the Constitution."^[34]

   Slave owners were angry over the attacks on what some Southerners
   (including the politician John C. Calhoun^[35]) referred to as their
   peculiar institution of slavery. Starting in the 1830s, Southerners
   developed a vehement and growing ideological defense of slavery.^[36]
   Slave owners claimed that slavery was a positive good for masters and
   slaves alike, and that it was explicitly sanctioned by God. Biblical
   arguments were made in defense of slavery by religious leaders such as
   the Rev. Fred A. Ross and political leaders such as Jefferson
   Davis.^[37] Southern biblical interpretations contradicted those of the
   abolitionists; a popular one was that the curse on Noah's son Ham and
   his descendants in Africa was a justification for enslavement of
   blacks.

Garrison and immediate emancipation[edit]

   William Lloyd Garrison (1805–1879), publisher of the abolitionist
   newspaper The Liberator and one of the founders of the American
   Anti-Slavery Society.

   A radical shift came in the 1830s, led by William Lloyd Garrison, who
   demanded "immediate emancipation, gradually achieved". That is, he
   demanded that slave-owners repent immediately, and set up a system of
   emancipation. Theodore Weld, an evangelical minister, and Robert
   Purvis, a free African American, joined Garrison in 1833 to form the
   American Anti-Slavery Society (Faragher 381). The following year Weld
   encouraged a group of students at Lane Theological Seminary to form an
   anti-slavery society. After the president, Lyman Beecher, tried to
   suppress the group, the students moved to Oberlin College.

   Due to the students' anti-slavery position, Oberlin soon became one of
   the most liberal colleges and accepted African-American students. Along
   with Garrison, Northcutt and Collins were proponents of immediate
   abolition. Abby Kelley Foster became an "ultra abolitionist" and a
   follower of William Lloyd Garrison. She led Susan B. Anthony as well as
   Elizabeth Cady Stanton into the anti-slavery cause.
   Frederick Douglass (1818–1895), a former slave whose memoirs, Narrative
   of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave (1845) and My
   Bondage and My Freedom (1855), became bestsellers which aided the cause
   of abolition.

   After 1840 "abolition" usually referred to positions similar to
   Garrison's; it was largely an ideological movement led by about 3000
   people, including free blacks and free people of color, many of whom,
   such as Frederick Douglass in New England, and Robert Purvis and James
   Forten in Philadelphia, played prominent leadership roles. Douglass
   became legally free during a two-year stay in England, as British
   supporters raised funds to purchase his freedom from his American owner
   Thomas Auld, and also helped fund his abolitionist newspapers in the
   US.^[38] Abolitionism had a strong religious base including Quakers,
   and people converted by the revivalist fervor of the Second Great
   Awakening, led by Charles Finney in the North in the 1830s. Belief in
   abolition contributed to the breaking away of some small denominations,
   such as the Free Methodist Church.

   Evangelical abolitionists founded some colleges, most notably Bates
   College in Maine and Oberlin College in Ohio. The well-established
   colleges, such as Harvard, Yale and Princeton, generally opposed
   abolition,^[citation needed] although the movement did attract such
   figures as Yale president Noah Porter and Harvard president Thomas
   Hill.

   In the North, most opponents of slavery supported other modernizing
   reform movements such as the temperance movement, public schooling, and
   prison- and asylum-building. They were split on the issue of women's
   activism and their political role, and this contributed to a major rift
   in the Society. In 1839, brothers Arthur Tappan and Lewis Tappan left
   the Society and formed the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society,
   which did not admit women. Other members of the Society, including
   Charles Turner Torrey, Amos Phelps, Henry Stanton, and Alanson St.
   Clair, in addition to disagreeing with Garrison on the women's issue,
   urged taking a much more activist approach to abolitionism and
   consequently challenged Garrison's leadership at the Society's annual
   meeting in January 1839. When the challenge was beaten back,^[39] they
   left and founded the New Organization, which adopted a more activist
   approach to freeing slaves. Soon after, in 1840, they formed the
   Liberty Party, which had as its sole platform the abolition of
   slavery.^[40] By the end of 1840, Garrison himself announced the
   formation of a third new organization, the Friends of Universal Reform,
   with sponsors and founding members including prominent reformers Maria
   Chapman, Abby Kelley Foster, Oliver Johnson, and Bronson Alcott (father
   of Louisa May Alcott).
   Alternative text
   Charles Turner Torrey, c. 1840, from Memoir of Rev. Charles T. Torrey,
   Joseph P. Lovejoy, ed. (Boston: John P. Jewett & Co.), 1847

   Abolitionists such as William Lloyd Garrison repeatedly condemned
   slavery for contradicting the principles of freedom and equality on
   which the country was founded. In 1854, Garrison wrote:

     I am a believer in that portion of the Declaration of American
     Independence in which it is set forth, as among self-evident truths,
     "that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their
     Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life,
     liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Hence, I am an abolitionist.
     Hence, I cannot but regard oppression in every form – and most of
     all, that which turns a man into a thing – with indignation and
     abhorrence. Not to cherish these feelings would be recreancy to
     principle. They who desire me to be dumb on the subject of slavery,
     unless I will open my mouth in its defense, ask me to give the lie
     to my professions, to degrade my manhood, and to stain my soul. I
     will not be a liar, a poltroon, or a hypocrite, to accommodate any
     party, to gratify any sect, to escape any odium or peril, to save
     any interest, to preserve any institution, or to promote any object.
     Convince me that one man may rightfully make another man his slave,
     and I will no longer subscribe to the Declaration of Independence.
     Convince me that liberty is not the inalienable birthright of every
     human being, of whatever complexion or clime, and I will give that
     instrument to the consuming fire. I do not know how to espouse
     freedom and slavery together.^[41]

Uncle Tom's Cabin[edit]

   The most influential abolitionist tract was Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852),
   the best-selling novel and play by Harriet Beecher Stowe. Outraged by
   the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 (which made the escape narrative part of
   everyday news), Stowe emphasized the horrors that abolitionists had
   long claimed about slavery. Her depiction of the evil slave owner Simon
   Legree, a transplanted Yankee who kills the Christ-like Uncle Tom,
   outraged the North, helped sway British public opinion against the
   South, and inflamed Southern slave owners who tried to refute it by
   showing some slave owners were humanitarian.^[42] It inspired numerous
   anti-Tom novels, several written and published by women.

American Catholics[edit]

   Officers and men of the Irish-Catholic 69th New York Volunteer Regiment
   attend Catholic services in 1861.

   Irish Catholics in America seldom challenged the role of slavery in
   society as it was protected at that time by the U.S. Constitution. They
   viewed the abolitionists as anti-Catholic and anti-Irish. Irish
   Catholics were generally well received by Democrats in the South.^[43]

   In contrast most Irish Nationalists and Fenians supported the abolition
   of slavery. Daniel O'Connell, the Catholic leader of the Irish in
   Ireland, supported the abolition of slavery in the United States. He
   organized a petition in Ireland with 60,000 signatures urging the Irish
   of the United States to support abolition. John O'Mahony, a founder of
   the Irish Republican Brotherhood was an abolitionist and served as
   Colonel in the 69th Infantry Regiment during the Civil War.^[44]

   The Irish Catholics in America were recent immigrants; most were poor
   and very few owned slaves. They had to compete with free blacks for
   unskilled labor jobs. They saw abolitionism as the militant wing of
   evangelical anti-Catholic Protestantism.^[45]

   The Catholic Church in America had long ties in slaveholding Maryland
   and Louisiana. Despite a firm stand for the spiritual equality of black
   people, and the resounding condemnation of slavery by Pope Gregory XVI
   in his bull In Supremo Apostolatus issued in 1839, the American church
   continued in deeds, if not in public discourse, to avoid confrontation
   with slaveholding interests. In 1861, the Archbishop of New York wrote
   to Secretary of War Cameron: "That the Church is opposed to slavery ...
   Her doctrine on that subject is, that it is a crime to reduce men
   naturally free to a condition of servitude and bondage, as slaves." No
   American bishop supported extra-political abolition or interference
   with state's rights before the Civil War.

   The secular Germans of the Forty-Eighter immigration were largely
   anti-slavery. Prominent Forty-Eighters included Carl Schurz and
   Friedrich Hecker. German Lutherans seldom took a position on slavery,
   but German Methodists were anti-slavery.

Abolitionist women[edit]

   Like many Quakers, Lucretia Mott considered slavery an evil to be
   opposed.

   William Lloyd Garrison's abolitionist newsletter the Liberator noted in
   1847, "... the Anti-Slavery cause cannot stop to estimate where the
   greatest indebtedness lies, but whenever the account is made up there
   can be no doubt that the efforts and sacrifices of the WOMEN, who
   helped it, will hold a most honorable and conspicuous position."^[46]
   As the Liberator states, women played a crucial role as leaders in the
   anti-slavery movement.

   Angelina and Sarah Grimké were the first female antislavery agents, and
   played a variety of roles in the abolitionist movement. Though born in
   the South, the Grimké sisters became disillusioned with slavery and
   moved North to get away from it. Perhaps because of their birthplace,
   the Grimké sisters' critiques carried particular weight and
   specificity. Angelina Grimké spoke of her thrill at seeing white men do
   manual labor of any kind.^[47] Their perspectives as native southerners
   as well as women, brought a new important point of view to the
   abolitionist movement. In 1836, they moved to New York and began work
   for the Anti-Slavery Society, where they met and were impressed by
   William Lloyd Garrison.^[48] The sisters wrote many pamphlets
   (Angelina's "Appeal to the Christian Women of the South" was the only
   appeal directly to southern women to defy slavery laws) and played
   leadership roles at the first Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women
   in 1837.^[49] The Grimkés later made a notable speaking tour around the
   north, which culminated in Angelina's February 1838 address to a
   Committee of the Legislature of Massachusetts.

   Lucretia Mott was active in the abolitionist movement. Though well
   known for her women's rights advocacy, Mott also played an important
   role in the abolitionist movement. Over forty years, she delivered
   sermons about abolitionism, women's rights, and a host of other issues.
   Mott acknowledged her Quaker beliefs' determinative role in affecting
   her abolitionist sentiment. She spoke of the "duty (that) was impressed
   upon me at the time I consecrated myself to that Gospel which anoints
   'to preach deliverance to the captive, to set at liberty them that are
   bruised ..."^[50] Mott's advocacy took a variety of forms: she worked
   with the Free Produce Society to boycott slave-made goods, volunteered
   with the Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women,
   and helped slaves escape to free territory.^[51]

   Abby Kelley Foster, with a strong Quaker heritage, helped lead Susan B.
   Anthony and Lucy Stone into the abolition movement. Kelley influenced
   future suffragists such as Susan B. Anthony and Lucy Stone by
   encouraging them to take on a role in political activism. She helped
   organize and was a key speaker at the first National Women's Rights
   Convention in Worcester, Massachusetts in 1850. (The Seneca Falls
   Convention, held in 1848, was not national).^[52] She was an "ultra"
   abolitionist who believed in immediate and complete civil rights for
   all slaves. SInce 1841, however, she resigned from the Quakers over
   disputes about not allowing anti-slavery speakers in meeting houses
   (including the Uxbridge monthly meeting where she had attended with her
   family), and the group disowned her.^[53]^[54]^[55] Abby Kelley became
   a leading speaker and the leading fundraiser for the American
   Anti-slavery Society. Radical abolitionism became known as "Abby
   Kelleyism."^[56]^[57]

   Other luminaries such as Lydia Maria Child, Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
   Susan B. Anthony, Harriet Tubman, and Sojourner Truth all played
   important roles in abolitionism. But even beyond these well-known
   women, abolitionism maintained impressive support from white
   middle-class and some black women. It was these women who performed
   many of the logistical, day-to-day tasks that made the movement
   successful. They raised money, wrote and distributed propaganda pieces,
   drafted and signed petitions, and lobbied the legislatures. Though
   abolitionism sowed the seeds of the women's rights movement, most women
   became involved in abolitionism because of a gendered religious
   worldview, and the idea that they had feminine, moral
   responsibilities.^[58] For example, in the winter of 1831–1832, three
   women's petitions were written to the Virginia legislature, advocating
   emancipation of the state's slave population. The only precedent for
   such action was Catharine Beecher's organization of a petition
   protesting the Cherokee removal.^[59] The Virginia petitions, while the
   first of their kind, were by no means the last. Similar backing
   increased leading up to the Civil War.

   Even as women played crucial roles in abolitionism, the movement
   simultaneously helped stimulate women's rights efforts. A full ten
   years before the Seneca Falls Convention, the Grimkés were travelling,
   lecturing about their experiences with slavery. As Gerda Lerner says,
   the Grimkés understood their actions' great impact. "In working for the
   liberation of the slave," Lerner writes, "Sarah and Angelina Grimké
   found the key to their own liberation. And the consciousness of the
   significance of their actions was clearly before them. 'We Abolition
   Women are turning the world upside down.'"^[60]

   Women gained important experiences in public speaking and organizing
   that stood them in good stead going forward. The Grimké sisters' public
   speaking played a critical part in legitimizing women's place in the
   public sphere.

   The July 1848 Seneca Falls Convention grew out of a partnership between
   Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton that blossomed while the two
   worked, at first, on abolitionist issues. Indeed, the two met at the
   World's Anti-Slavery Convention in the summer of 1840.^[61] Mott
   brought oratorical skills and an impressive reputation as an
   abolitionist to the nascent women's rights movement.

   Abolitionism brought together active women and enabled them to make
   political and personal connections while honing communication and
   organizational skills. Even Sojourner Truth, commonly associated with
   abolitionism, delivered her first documented public speech at the 1850
   National Women's Rights Convention in Worcester. There, she argued for
   women's reform activism.^[62]

Progress of abolition in the United States[edit]

   Main articles: Origins of the American Civil War and Slavery in the
   United States
   See also: Timeline of the African-American Civil Rights Movement

To 1804[edit]

   Although there were several groups that opposed slavery (such as the
   Society for the Relief of Free Negroes Unlawfully Held in Bondage), at
   the time of the founding of the Republic, there were few states which
   prohibited slavery outright. The Constitution had several provisions
   which accommodated slavery, although none used the word. Passed
   unanimously by the Congress of the Confederation in 1787, the Northwest
   Ordinance forbade slavery in the Northwest Territory, a vast area which
   had previously belonged to individual states in which slavery was
   legal.
   Samuel Sewall (1652–1730), judge who wrote The Selling of Joseph (1700)
   which denounced the spread of slavery in the American colonies.

   American abolitionism began very early, well before the United States
   was founded as a nation. An early law abolishing slavery (but not
   temporary indentured servitude) in Rhode Island in 1652 floundered
   within 50 years.^[63] Samuel Sewall, a prominent Bostonian and one of
   the judges at the Salem Witch Trials, wrote The Selling of Joseph^[64]
   in protest of the widening practice of outright slavery as opposed to
   indentured servitude in the colonies. This is the earliest-recorded
   anti-slavery tract published in the future United States.

   In 1777, Vermont, not yet a state, became the first jurisdiction in
   North America to prohibit slavery: slaves were not directly freed, but
   masters were required to remove slaves from Vermont. The first state to
   begin a gradual abolition of slavery was Pennsylvania, in 1780. All
   importation of slaves was prohibited, but none freed at first; only the
   slaves of masters who failed to register them with the state, along
   with the "future children" of enslaved mothers. Those enslaved in
   Pennsylvania before the 1780 law went into effect were not freed until
   1847.^[65]

   Massachusetts took a much more radical position. Its Supreme Court
   ruled in 1783, that a black man was, indeed, a man; and therefore free
   under the state's constitution.
   An animation showing when states and territories forbade or admitted
   slavery 1789–1861
   Wood engraving of proslavery riot in Alton, Illinois on 7 November
   1837, which resulted in the murder of abolitionist Elijah Parish
   Lovejoy (1802–1837).

   All of the other states north of Maryland began gradual abolition of
   slavery between 1781 and 1804, based on the Pennsylvania model.

South[edit]

   The institution remained solid in the South, however and that region's
   customs and social beliefs evolved into a strident defense of slavery
   in response to the rise of a stronger anti-slavery stance in the North.
   In 1835 alone abolitionists mailed over a million pieces of
   anti-slavery literature to the south. In response southern legislators
   banned abolitionist literature and encouraged harassment of anyone
   distributing it.

Immediate abolition[edit]

   Abolitionists included those who joined the American Anti-Slavery
   Society or its auxiliary groups in the 1830s and 1840s as the movement
   fragmented.^[66] The fragmented anti-slavery movement included groups
   such as the Liberty Party; the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery
   Society; the American Missionary Association; and the Church
   Anti-Slavery Society. Historians traditionally distinguish between
   moderate antislavery reformers or gradualists, who concentrated on
   stopping the spread of slavery, and radical abolitionists or
   immediatists, whose demands for unconditional emancipation often merged
   with a concern for black civil rights. However, James Stewart advocates
   a more nuanced understanding of the relationship of abolition and
   antislavery prior to the Civil War:

     While instructive, the distinction [between antislavery and
     abolition] can also be misleading, especially in assessing
     abolitionism's political impact. For one thing, slaveholders never
     bothered with such fine points. Many immediate abolitionists showed
     no less concern than did other white Northerners about the fate of
     the nation's "precious legacies of freedom." Immediatism became most
     difficult to distinguish from broader anti-Southern opinions once
     ordinary citizens began articulating these intertwining
     beliefs.^[67]

   Anti-slavery advocates were outraged by the murder of Elijah Parish
   Lovejoy, a white man and editor of an abolitionist newspaper on 7
   November 1837, by a pro-slavery mob in Illinois. Nearly all Northern
   politicians rejected the extreme positions of the abolitionists;
   Abraham Lincoln, for example. Indeed many northern leaders including
   Lincoln, Stephen Douglas (the Democratic nominee in 1860), John C.
   Fremont (the Republican nominee in 1856), and Ulysses S. Grant married
   into slave owning southern families without any moral qualms.
   Lysander Spooner (1808–1887), an individualist anarchist who wrote The
   Unconstitutionality of Slavery (1845).

   Antislavery as a principle was far more than just the wish to limit the
   extent of slavery. Most Northerners recognized that slavery existed in
   the South and the Constitution did not allow the federal government to
   intervene there. Most Northerners favored a policy of gradual and
   compensated emancipation. After 1849 abolitionists rejected this and
   demanded it end immediately and everywhere. John Brown was the only
   abolitionist known to have actually planned a violent insurrection,
   though David Walker promoted the idea. The abolitionist movement was
   strengthened by the activities of free African-Americans, especially in
   the black church, who argued that the old Biblical justifications for
   slavery contradicted the New Testament.

   African-American activists and their writings were rarely heard outside
   the black community; however, they were tremendously influential to
   some sympathetic white people, most prominently the first white
   activist to reach prominence, William Lloyd Garrison, who was its most
   effective propagandist. Garrison's efforts to recruit eloquent
   spokesmen led to the discovery of ex-slave Frederick Douglass, who
   eventually became a prominent activist in his own right. Eventually,
   Douglass would publish his own, widely distributed abolitionist
   newspaper, the North Star.

   In the early 1850s, the American abolitionist movement split into two
   camps over the issue of the United States Constitution. This issue
   arose in the late 1840s after the publication of The
   Unconstitutionality of Slavery by Lysander Spooner. The Garrisonians,
   led by Garrison and Wendell Phillips, publicly burned copies of the
   Constitution, called it a pact with slavery, and demanded its abolition
   and replacement. Another camp, led by Lysander Spooner, Gerrit Smith,
   and eventually Douglass, considered the Constitution to be an
   antislavery document. Using an argument based upon Natural Law and a
   form of social contract theory, they said that slavery existed outside
   the Constitution's scope of legitimate authority and therefore should
   be abolished.

   Another split in the abolitionist movement was along class lines. The
   artisan republicanism of Robert Dale Owen and Frances Wright stood in
   stark contrast to the politics of prominent elite abolitionists such as
   industrialist Arthur Tappan and his evangelist brother Lewis. While the
   former pair opposed slavery on a basis of solidarity of "wage slaves"
   with "chattel slaves", the Whiggish Tappans strongly rejected this
   view, opposing the characterization of Northern workers as "slaves" in
   any sense. (Lott, 129–130)
   Idealized portrait of John Brown being adored by an enslaved mother and
   child as he walks to his execution.

   Many American abolitionists took an active role in opposing slavery by
   supporting the Underground Railroad.^[68] This was made illegal by the
   federal Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. Nevertheless, participants like
   Harriet Tubman, Henry Highland Garnet, Alexander Crummell, Amos Noë
   Freeman and others continued with their work. Abolitionists were
   particularly active in Ohio, where some worked directly in the
   Underground Railroad. Since the state shared a border with slave
   states, it was a popular place for slaves' escaping across the Ohio
   River and up its tributaries, where they sought shelter among
   supporters who would help them move north to freedom. Two significant
   events in the struggle to destroy slavery were the Oberlin-Wellington
   Rescue and John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry. In the South, members of
   the abolitionist movement or other people opposing slavery were often
   targets of lynch mob violence before the American Civil War.^[69]

   Numerous known abolitionists lived, worked, and worshipped in Downtown
   Brooklyn, from Henry Ward Beecher, who auctioned slaves into freedom
   from the pulpit of Plymouth Church, to Nathan Egelston, a leader of the
   African and Foreign Antislavery Society, who also preached at Bridge
   Street AME and lived on Duffield Street. His fellow Duffield Street
   residents, Thomas and Harriet Truesdell were leading members of the
   Abolitionist movement. Mr. Truesdell was a founding member of the
   Providence Anti-slavery Society before moving to Brooklyn in 1851.
   Harriet Truesdell was also very active in the movement, organizing an
   antislavery convention in Pennsylvania Hall in Philadelphia. The
   Tuesdell's lived at 227 Duffield Street. Another prominent
   Brooklyn-based abolitionist was Rev. Joshua Leavitt, trained as a
   lawyer at Yale who stopped practicing law in order to attend Yale
   Divinity School, and subsequently edited the abolitionist newspaper The
   Emancipator and campaigned against slavery, as well as advocating other
   social reforms. In 1841 Leavitt published his The Financial Power of
   Slavery, which argued that the South was draining the national economy
   due to its reliance on slavery.

1850s[edit]

Compromise of 1850[edit]

   Main article: Compromise of 1850

   The Compromise of 1850 attempted to resolve issues surrounding slavery
   caused by the War with Mexico and the admission to the Union of the
   slave Republic of Texas. The Compromise of 1850 was proposed by "The
   Great Compromiser," Henry Clay and was passed by Senator Stephen A.
   Douglas. Through the compromise, California was admitted as a free
   state after its state convention unanimously opposed slavery there;
   Texas was financially compensated for the loss of its territories; the
   slave trade (not slavery) was abolished in the District of Columbia;
   the Fugitive Slave Law was passed as a concession to the South.
   Abolitionists were outraged because the new law required Northerners to
   help in the capture and return of runaway slaves.^[70]

Republican Party[edit]

   Main article: History of the United States Republican Party

   In 1854 Congress passed the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which opened those
   territories to slavery if the local residents voted that way. The
   antislavery gains made in previous compromises were reversed. A
   firestorm of outrage brought together former Whigs and former Free Soil
   Democrats to form a new party in 1854-56, the Republican party. It
   included a program of rapid modernization involving the government
   promotion of industry, railroads, banks, free homesteads, and colleges,
   all to the annoyance of the South. The new party denounced the Slave
   Power—that is the political power of the slave owners who supposedly
   controlled the national government for their own benefit and to the
   disadvantage of the ordinary white man.^[71]
   This Democratic editorial cartoon links Republican candidate John
   Frémont (far right) to other radical movements including temperance,
   feminism, Fourierism, free love, Catholicism, and abolition.

   Western explorer John C. Frémont ran as the first Republican nominee
   for president in 1856, using the political slogan: "Free soil, free
   silver, free men, Frémont and victory!" Although he lost, the party
   showed a strong base. It dominated in Yankee areas of New England, New
   York and the northern Midwest, and had a strong presence in the rest of
   the North. It had almost no support in the South, where it was roundly
   denounced in 1856–60 as a divisive force that threatened civil
   war.^[72]

   Without using the term "containment", the new Party in the mid-1850s
   proposed a system of containing slavery, once it gained control of the
   national government. Historian James Oakes explains the strategy:

          "The federal government would surround the south with free
          states, free territories, and free waters, building what they
          called a 'cordon of freedom' around slavery, hemming it in until
          the system's own internal weaknesses forced the slave states one
          by one to abandon slavery."^[73]

   Abolitionists demanded immediate emancipation not a slow-acting
   containment. They rejected the new party, and in turn its leaders
   reassured voters they were not abolitionists.

John Brown[edit]

   John Brown (1800–1859), abolitionist who advocated armed rebellion by
   slaves. He slaughtered pro-slavery settlers in Kansas and in 1859 was
   hanged by the state of Virginia for leading an unsuccessful slave
   insurrection at Harpers Ferry.

   Historian Frederick Blue called John Brown "the most controversial of
   all 19th-century Americans."^[74] When Brown was hanged after his
   attempt to start a slave rebellion in 1859, church bells rang, minute
   guns were fired, large memorial meetings took place throughout the
   North, and famous writers such as Emerson and Henry David Thoreau
   joined many Northerners in praising Brown.^[75] Whereas Garrison was a
   pacifist, Brown resorted to violence. Historians agree he played a
   major role in starting the war. Some historians regard Brown as a
   crazed lunatic while David S. Reynolds hails him as the man who "killed
   slavery, sparked the civil war, and seeded civil rights." For Ken
   Chowder he is "the father of American terrorism."^[76]

   His famous raid in October 1859, involved a band of 22 men who seized
   the federal Harpers Ferry Armory at Harper's Ferry, West Virginia (then
   part of Virginia), knowing it contained tens of thousands of weapons.
   Brown believed that the South was on the verge of a gigantic slave
   uprising and that one spark would set it off. Brown's supporters George
   Luther Stearns, Franklin B. Sanborn, Thomas Wentworth Higginson,
   Theodore Parker, Samuel Gridley Howe and Gerrit Smith were all
   abolitionist members of the Secret Six who provided financial backing
   for Brown's raid. Brown's raid, says historian David Potter, "was meant
   to be of vast magnitude and to produce a revolutionary slave uprising
   throughout the South." The raid was a fiasco. Not a single slave
   revolted. Lt. Colonel Robert E. Lee of the U.S. Army was dispatched to
   put down the raid, and Brown was quickly captured. Brown was tried for
   treason against Virginia and hanged. At his trial, Brown exuded a
   remarkable zeal and single-mindedness that played directly to
   Southerners' worst fears. Few individuals did more to cause secession
   than John Brown, because Southerners believed he was right about an
   impending slave revolt. Shortly before his execution, Brown prophesied,
   "the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away; but with
   Blood."^[77]

American Civil War[edit]

   From the beginning of the American Civil War, Union leaders identified
   slavery as the social and economic foundation of the Confederacy, and
   from 1862 were determined to end that support system. Meanwhile
   pro-Union forces gained control of the Border States and began the
   process of emancipation in Maryland, Missouri and West Virginia.
   Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation on 1 January 1863. The
   passage of the Thirteenth Amendment (ratified in December 1865)
   abolished slavery in the United States, officially freeing more than
   50,000 people still enslaved in Kentucky and Delaware.^[78]^[79]^[80]

See also[edit]

     * Abolitionism in the United Kingdom
     * Abolitionism in France
     * John Quincy Adams and abolitionism
     * American Anti-Slavery Society
     * American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, a spin-off of the
       American Anti-Slavery Society
     * Come-outer
     * Compensated emancipation
     * List of opponents of slavery
     * Fire-Eaters
     * James Redpath
     * The Slave Power

References[edit]

    1. ^ Wilson, Thomas, The Oglethorpe Plan, 201-206
    2. ^ James M. McPherson (1995). The Abolitionist Legacy: From
       Reconstruction to the Naacp. Princeton U.P. p. 4.
    3. ^ ^a ^b Monticello Foundation, 2012
    4. ^ Seymour Stanton Black. Benjamin Franklin: Genius of Kites,
       Flights, and Voting Rights.
    5. ^ Peterson, 1960 p.189
    6. ^ Cogliano 2006, p. 219.
    7. ^ Stanton (1993),
       http://books.google.com/books?id=K1m1tRlh7xQC&pg=PA147#v=onepage&q&
       f=false
    8. ^ Introduction – Social Aspects of the Civil War, National Park
       Service
    9. ^ Leon F. Litwack and August Meier, eds., "John Mercer Langston:
       Principle and Politics", in Black Leaders of the 19th century,
       University of Illinois Press, 1991, pp. 106–111
   10. ^ James A. Morone (2004). Hellfire Nation: The Politics Of Sin In
       American History. Yale U.P. p. 154.
   11. ^ Wilson, Thomas, The Oglethorpe Plan, 128-133
   12. ^ Newman, Richard S. (2002). The Transformation of American
       Abolitionism: Fighting Slavery in the Early Republic. Chapel Hill:
       U. of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-2671-5.
   13. ^ John Woolman. A Quaker Abolitionist Travels Through Maryland and
       Virginia Extract from The Journal of John Woolman, 1757, New York:
       Houghton Mifflin, 1909, 209–217.
   14. ^ Thomas Paine; Thomas Paul Slaughter (2001). Common Sense and
       Related Writings. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 57.
   15. ^ Dictionary of Afro-American Slavery By Randall M. Miller, John
       David Smith. Greenwood Publishing Group, 1997. p.471.
   16. ^ Population of the United States in 1860, p313 Eight Census of the
       United States, 1860
   17. ^ Ira Berlin and Leslie Harris (2005); Gellman (2006);
   18. ^ Foner, Eric. "Forgotten step towards freedom", New York Times. 30
       December 2007,
   19. ^ "Africans in America" – PBS Series – Part 4 (2007)
   20. ^ Seymour Drescher, Abolition: A History of Slavery and Antislavery
       (Cambridge University Press, 2009)
   21. ^ William Edward Burghardt Du Bois (1904). The Suppression of the
       African Slave-trade to the United States of America, 1638-1870.
       p. 95.
   22. ^ David Head, Slave Smuggling by Foreign Privateers: The Illegal
       Slave Trade and the Geopolitics of the Early Republic," Journal of
       the Early Republic (2013) 33#3 p 538
   23. ^ Andrew Levy, The First Emancipator: Slavery, Religion and the
       Quiet Revolution of Robert Carter, New York: Random House, 2005,
       p.xi
   24. ^ ^a ^b Peter Kolchin, American Slavery, 1619–1877, New York: Hill
       and Wang, 1994, pp.78, 81–82
   25. ^ Schlesinger Age of Jackson, p.190
   26. ^ David Brion Davis, Inhuman Bondage (2006) p 197, 409; Stanley
       Harrold, The Abolitionists and the South, 1831–1861 (1995) p. 62;
       Jane H. and William H. Pease, "Confrontation and Abolition in the
       1850s" Journal of American History (1972) 58(4): 923–937.
   27. ^ Eric Foner. Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the
       Republican Party Before the Civil War (1970), p. 9
   28. ^ ^a ^b "An activist path: Mill owner founded Uxbridge anti-slavery
       society, by Susan Spence". www.telegram.com. Retrieved 2012-09-28.
   29. ^ Lincoln on Slavery
   30. ^ Maggie Montesinos Sale (1997). The slumbering volcano: American
       slave ship revolts and the production of rebellious masculinity.
       p.264. Duke University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-8223-1992-6
   31. ^ "History Haunts War-Torn Liberia", National Geographic, July 2003
   32. ^ ^a ^b Taylor, Nikki M. Frontiers of Freedom: Cincinnati's Black
       Community, 1802–1868. Ohio University Press, 2005, ISBN
       0-8214-1579-4, pp. 50–79.
   33. ^ "Amistad", Smithsonian Institution
   34. ^ James Brewer Stewart, Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists and
       American Slavery (1976)
   35. ^ "John C. Calhoun", Clemson University
   36. ^ David Brion Davis, Inhuman Bondage (2006), pp 186–192.
   37. ^ Mitchell Snay, "American Thought and Southern Distinctiveness:
       The Southern Clergy and the Sanctification of Slavery", Civil War
       History (1989) 35(4): 311–328; Elizabeth Fox-Genovese and Eugene D.
       Genovese, The Mind of the Master Class: History and Faith in the
       Southern Slaveholders' Worldview (2005), pp 505–27.
   38. ^ Marianne Ruuth (1996). Frederick Douglass p. 117–118. Holloway
       House Publishing, 1996
   39. ^ Chapman, Maria Weston (1839). Right and Wrong in Massachusetts.
       Boston: Dow and Jackson.
   40. ^ Torrey, E. Fuller (2013). The Martyrdom of Abolitionist Charles
       Torrey. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
   41. ^ Wm. L. Garrison (1854). "No Compromise with Slavery". ; also
       Mayer: All in the Fire, pp. 65–67, 475.
   42. ^ Noel B, Gerson, Harriet Beecher Stowe (1976) p.68
   43. ^ John F. Quinn, "Expecting the Impossible? Abolitionist Appeals to
       the Irish in Antebellum America," New England Quarterly (2009) 82#4
       pp 667–710
   44. ^ The Fenians: Irish Rebellion in the North Atlantic World, 1858 –
       1876 Patrick Steward, Bryan P. McGovern. Pg51
   45. ^ Bryan P. McGovern (2009). John Mitchel: Irish Nationalist,
       Southern Secessionist. U. of Tennessee Press. p. 138.
   46. ^ Jeffrey, Julie Roy (1998). The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism.
       Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. p. 1.
   47. ^ Lerner, Gerda (2004). The Grimké Sisters from South Carolina:
       Pioneers for Women's Rights and Abolition. Chapel Hill, NC:
       University of North Carolina Press. p. 61.
   48. ^ Lerner, Gerda (2004). The Grimké Sisters from South Carolina:
       Pioneers for Women's Rights and Abolition. Chapel Hill, NC:
       University of North Carolina Press. pp. 101–2.
   49. ^ Lerner, Gerda (October 1963). "The Grimke Sisters and the
       Struggle Against Race Prejudice". The Journal of Negro History 48
       (4): 278 and 285.
   50. ^ Greene, Dana (April 1981). "Quaker Feminism: The Case of Lucretia
       Mott". Pennsylvania History 48 (2): 149.
   51. ^ Turner, Lorenzo D. (April 1959). "'Lucretia Mott.' by Otelia
       Cromwell". The Journal of Negro History 44 (2): 186.
   52. ^ "Abby Kelley Foster at First National Woman's Rights Convention".
       Worcester Women's History Project. Retrieved 2010-07-23.
   53. ^ Morin 1994, p. 19.
   54. ^ Sterling 1991, p. 123.
   55. ^ Buffum, Lucille (1914). Elizabeth Buffum Chase- Her Life and its
       Environment. W. B. Clarke Co.
   56. ^ Sterling 1991, pp. 1--3, 41--59, 230.
   57. ^ Morin 1994, pp. 19--20.
   58. ^ Jeffrey, Julie Roy (1998). The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism.
       Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. p. 2.
   59. ^ Breen, Patrick H. (2002). "The Female Antislavery Petition
       Campaign of 1831–32". The Virginia Magazine of History and
       Biography 110 (3): 377.
   60. ^ Lerner, Gerda (2004). The Grimké Sisters from South Carolina:
       Pioneers for Women's Rights and Abolition. Chapel Hill, NC:
       University of North Carolina Press. p. 10.
   61. ^ Sklar, Kathryn (2000). Women's Rights Emerges Within the
       Anti-Slavery Movement, 1830–1870: A Brief History with Documents.
       Boston: St Martin's. p. 50.
   62. ^ Sklar, Kathryn (2000). Women's Rights Emerges Within the
       Anti-Slavery Movement, 1830–1870: A Brief History with Documents.
       Boston: St Martin's. p. 63.
   63. ^ Lauber, Almon Wheeler, Indian Slavery in Colonial Times Within
       the Present Limits of the United States. New York: Columbia
       University, 1913. See also the Rhode Island Historical Society FAQ.
   64. ^ Sewall, Samuel (1700). The Selling of Joseph: A Memorial. Boston:
       Bartholomew Green and John Allen (Massachusetts Historical
       Society). Retrieved 9 December 2011.
   65. ^ Pennsylvania's Gradual Abolition Act
   66. ^ Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists and American Slavery by James
       Brewer Stewart, p. 78
   67. ^ James Brewer Stewart (1997). Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists and
       American Slavery. Macmillan. p. 78.
   68. ^ Blight, David W. (2001)Passages to Freedom: The Underground
       Railroad in History and Memory. Smithsonian Books
   69. ^ Lynching an Abolitionist in Mississippi.
   70. ^ Fergus M. Bordewich, America's Great Debate: Henry Clay, Stephen
       A. Douglas, and the Compromise That Preserved the Union (2012)
       excerpt and text search
   71. ^ Lewis Gould, Grand Old Party: A History of the Republicans (2003)
       ch 1
   72. ^ Eric Foner. Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the
       Republican Party Before the Civil War (1970)
   73. ^ James Oakes (2012). Freedom National: The Destruction of Slavery
       in the United States, 1861-1865. W. W. Norton. p. 12.
   74. ^ Frederick J. Blue in American Historical Review (April 2006) v.
       111 p 481–2.
   75. ^ David Potter, The Impending Crisis (1976), pp 378–379
   76. ^ David S. Reynolds, John Brown, Abolitionist: The Man Who Killed
       Slavery, Sparked the Civil War, and Seeded Civil Rights (2005); Ken
       Chowder, "The Father of American Terrorism." American Heritage
       (2000) 51(1): 81+ online at
       files.blog-city.com/files/M06/158072/b/chowder.pdf at the Wayback
       Machine (archived August 8, 2007) and Stephen Oates quoted at
       Archived May 10, 2009 at the Wayback Machine
   77. ^ David Potter, The Impending Crisis: 1848–1861 (1976), chapter 14,
       quote from p. 367. Allan Nevins, Ordeal of the Union: A House
       Dividing, pages 472–477 and The Emergence of Lincoln, vol 2, pages
       71–97
   78. ^ Foner, Eric (2010). The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American
       Slavery. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-06618-0.
   79. ^ Lowell Harrison & James C. Klotter, A New History of Kentucky,
       University Press of Kentucky, 1997; p. 180; ISBN 9780813126210
   80. ^ Hornsby, Alan, ed. (2011). "Delaware". Black America: A
       State-by-State Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 139.

Further reading[edit]

     * Abzug, Robert H. Cosmos Crumbling: American Reform and the
       Religious Imagination. Oxford, 1994. ISBN 0-19-503752-9.
     * Bacon, Jacqueline. The Humblest May Stand Forth: Rhetoric,
       Empowerment, and Abolition. University of South Carolina Press,
       2002. ISBN 1-57003-434-6.
     * Barnes, Gilbert H. The Anti-Slavery Impulse 1830–1844. Reprint,
       1964. ISBN 0-7812-5307-1.
     * Berlin, Ira and Leslie Harris (eds.) Slavery in New York. New
       Press, 2005. ISBN 1-56584-997-3.
     * Blue, Frederick J. No Taint of Compromise: Crusaders in Antislavery
       Politics. Louisiana State University Press, 2004. ISBN
       0-8071-2976-3.
     * Bordewich, Fergus M. Bound for Canaan: The Underground Railroad and
       the War for the Soul of America. HarperCollins, 2005. ISBN
       0-06-052430-8.
     * Carey, Brycchan. From Peace to Freedom: Quaker Rhetoric and the
       Birth of American Antislavery, 1657-1761. New Haven, CT: Yale
       University Press, 2012.
     * Cogliano, Francis D (2006). Thomas Jefferson: Reputation and
       Legacy. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-2499-7.
     * Crawford, Alan Pell (2008). Twilight at Monticello: The Final Years
       of Thomas Jefferson. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6079-5.
     * Davis, David Brion, Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery
       in the New World Oxford, 2006. ISBN 0-19-514073-7.
     * Delbanco, Andrew. The Abolitionist Imagination. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press, 2012.
     * Filler, Louis. The Crusade Against Slavery 1830–1860. 1960. ISBN
       0-917256-29-8.
     * Frost, Karolyn Smardz; Osei, Kwasi (Cover design); South, Sunny
       (Cover art) (2007). I've Got a Home in Glory Land: A Lost Tale of
       the Underground Railroad. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
       ISBN 978-0-374-16481-2.  ISBN 978-0-374-53125-6. Winner, 2007
       Governor General's Literary Award for Nonfiction; Nominee
       (Nonfiction), National Book Critics Circle Award 2007. See,
       Governor General's Award for English language non-fiction.
     * David Nathaniel Gellman. Emancipating New York: The Politics of
       Slavery And Freedom, 1777–1827 Louisiana State University Press,
       2006. ISBN 0-8071-3174-1.
     * Griffin, Clifford S. Their Brothers' Keepers: Moral Stewardship in
       the United States 1800–1865. Rutgers University Press, 1967. ISBN
       0-313-24059-0.
     * Hammond, John Craig and Matthew Mason (eds.) Contesting Slavery:
       The Politics of Bondage and Freedom in the New American Nation.
       Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press, 2011.
     * Harrold, Stanley. The Abolitionists and the South, 1831–1861.
       University Press of Kentucky, 1995. ISBN 0-8131-0968-X.
     * Harrold, Stanley. The American Abolitionists. Longman, 2000. ISBN
       0-582-35738-1.
     * Harrold, Stanley. The Rise of Aggressive Abolitionism: Addresses to
       the Slaves. University Press of Kentucky, 2004. ISBN 0-8131-2290-2.
     * Hassard, John R. G. The Life of John Hughes: First Archbishop of
       New York. Arno Press, 1969
     * Horton, James Oliver. "Alexander Hamilton: Slavery and Race in a
       Revolutionary Generation" New-York Journal of American History 2004
       65(3): 16–24. ISSN 1551–5486
     * Huston, James L. "The Experiential Basis of the Northern
       Antislavery Impulse." Journal of Southern History 56:4 (November
       1990): 609–640.
     * Mayer, Henry All on Fire: William Lloyd Garrison and the Abolition
       of Slavery St. Martin's Press, 1998. ISBN 0-312-18740-8.
     * McKivigan, John R. The War Against Proslavery Religion:
       Abolitionism and the Northern Churches, 1830–1865 Cornell
       University Press, 1984. ISBN 0-8014-1589-6.
     * McPherson, James M. The Abolitionist Legacy: From Reconstruction to
       the NAACP Princeton University Press, 1975. ISBN 0-691-04637-9.
     * Osofsky, Gilbert. "Abolitionists, Irish Immigrants, and the
       Dilemmas of Romantic Nationalism" American Historical Review 1975
       80(4): 889–912. ISSN 0002-8762 in JSTOR
     * Perry, Lewis and Michael Fellman, eds. Antislavery Reconsidered:
       New Perspectives on the Abolitionists. Louisiana State University
       Press, 1979. ISBN 0-8071-0889-8.
     * Peterson, Merrill D. John Brown: The Legend Revisited. University
       Press of Virginia, 2002. ISBN 0-8139-2132-5.
     * Peterson, Merrill D. (1960). The Jefferson Image in the American
       Mind. University of Virginia Press. p. 548. ISBN 0-8139-1851-0.
     * Pierson, Michael D. Free Hearts and Free Homes: Gender and American
       Antislavery Politics. University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
       ISBN 0-8078-2782-7.
     * Schafer, Judith Kelleher. Becoming Free, Remaining Free:
       Manumission and Enslavement in New Orleans, 1846–1862. Louisiana
       State University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-8071-2862-7.
     * Salerno, Beth A. Sister Societies: Women's Antislavery
       Organizations in Antebellum America. Northern Illinois University
       Press, 2005. ISBN 0-87580-338-5.
     * Speicher, Anna M. The Religious World of Antislavery Women:
       Spirituality in the Lives of Five Abolitionist Lecturers. Syracuse
       University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-8156-2850-1.
     * Stauffer, John. The Black Hearts of Men: Radical Abolitionists and
       the Transformation of Race. Harvard University Press, 2002. ISBN
       0-674-00645-3.
     * Vorenberg, Michael. Final Freedom: The Civil War, the Abolition of
       Slavery, and the Thirteenth Amendment. Cambridge University Press,
       2001. ISBN 0-521-65267-7.
     * Wilson, Thomas D. The Oglethorpe Plan: Enlightenment Design in
       Savannah and Beyond. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia
       Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0-8139-3290-3.
     * Zilversmit, Arthur. The First Emancipation: The Abolition of
       Slavery in the North. University of Chicago Press, 1967. ISBN
       0-226-98332-3.

External links[edit]

   Wikiquote has quotations related to: Abolitionism in the United States
   Wikisource has the text of the 1921 Collier's Encyclopedia article
   Abolitionists.
     * Original Document Proposing Abolition of Slavery 13th Amendment
     * "John Brown's body and blood" by Ari Kelman: a review in the TLS,
       14 February 2007.
     * Report of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and
       Justice
     * Elijah Parish Lovejoy: A Martyr on the Altar of American Liberty
     * Teaching resources about Slavery and Abolition on
       blackhistory4schools.com
     * The slavery debate
     * John Brown Museum
     * American Abolitionism
     * Underground Railroad: Escape from Slavery | Scholatic.com
     * National Underground Railroad Freedom Center in Cincinnati, Ohio
     * The Liberator Files, Horace Seldon's collection and summary of
       research of William Lloyd Garrison's The Liberator original copies
       at the Boston Public Library, Boston, Massachusetts.
     * University of Detroit Mercy Black Abolitionist Archive, a
       collection of over 800 speeches by antebellum blacks and
       approximately 1,000 editorials from the period.


                               * v
     * t
     * e

   Underground Railroad
   People
            * Levi Coffin
            * Calvin Fairbank
            * Thomas Garrett
            * Laura Smith Haviland
            * Daniel Hughes
            * William Cooper Nell
            * John Rankin
            * William Still
            * Harriet Beecher Stowe
            * Sojourner Truth
            * Harriet Tubman
            * more...

                                                          Ursa major icon.svg
   Places
            * List of Underground Railroad sites
                 + houses
                 + churches
            * Levi Coffin House
            * Bialystoker Synagogue
            * Bilger's Rocks
            * Wilson Bruce Evans House
            * Cyrus Gates Farmstead
            * Sites in Indiana
                 + Allen Chapel
                 + Town Clock Church
            * F. Julius LeMoyne House
            * National Underground Railroad Freedom Center
            * John Rankin House
            * John Freeman Walls Historic Site

   Events
            * Oberlin-Wellington Rescue
            * Pearl incident
            * Jerry Rescue
            * Uncle Tom's Cabin
            * Dred: A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp
            * Thirteenth Amendment

   Topics
            * Songs of the Underground Railroad
            * The Underground Railroad Records
            * Abolitionism in the United States
                 + Abolitionism
                 + opponents of slavery
                 + African-American opponents
                 + publications
            * Fugitive slaves
            * Fugitive slave laws
                 + 1850
            * Quilts

   See also: Slavery in the United States and Slavery in Canada

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Slave narrative
     * Slave Narrative Collection
     * Captivity narrative

   Individuals
   by continent
   of enslavement

   Africa
     * Robert Adams (b. c. 1790 US)
     * Francis Bok (b. 1979 Sudan)
     * James Leander Cathcart (1 June 1767 Ire – 6 October 1843 US)
     * Mende Nazer (1982-)
     * Thomas Pellow (b. 1705 Eng – ?)

   Caribbean
     * Juan Francisco Manzano (1797 – 1854, Cuba)
     * Mary Prince
     * Venerable Pierre Toussaint (1766 Saint-Dominque – June 30, 1853 NY)
     * Marcos Xiorro (c. 1819 - ???, Puerto Rico)

   Europe
     * Olaudah Equiano (c. 1745 Nigeria – 31 March 1797 Eng)
     * Ukawsaw Gronniosaw (c. 1705 Bornu – 1775 Eng)
     * Roustam Raza
     * Lovisa von Burghausen (1698-1733)

   North America:
   Canada
     * Marie-Joseph Angélique (c. 1710 Portugal – 1734 Montreal)

   North America:
   United States
     * Sam Aleckson
     * Jordan Anderson
     * William J. Anderson
     * Jared Maurice Arter
     * Solomon Bayley
     * Polly Berry
     * Henry Bibb
     * Leonard Black
     * Henry "Box" Brown
     * John Brown
     * William Wells Brown
     * Peter Bruner (1845 KY – 1938 OH)
     * Ellen and William Craft
     * Hannah Crafts
     * Lucinda Davis
     * Noah Davis
     * Lucy Delaney
     * Ayuba Suleiman Diallo
     * Frederick Douglass
     * Kate Drumgoold
     * Jordan Winston Early (1814 – after 1894)
     * Sarah Jane Woodson Early
     * David George
     * Moses Grandy
     * William Green (19th century MD)
     * Josiah Henson
     * Fountain Hughes (1848/1854 VA – 1957)
     * John Andrew Jackson
     * Harriet Ann Jacobs
     * John Jea
     * Thomas James (minister)
     * Paul Jennings (1799-1874)
     * Elizabeth Keckley
     * Boston King
     * Lunsford Lane
     * J. Vance Lewis
     * Jermain Wesley Loguen
     * Solomon Northup
     * John Parker (1827 VA – 1900)
     * William Parker
     * James Robert
     * Moses Roper
     * Omar Ibn Said
     * William Henry Singleton
     * Venture Smith
     * Austin Steward (1793 VA – 1860)
     * Venerable Pierre Toussaint (1766 Saint-Dominque – 1853 NY)
     * Harriet Tubman
     * Wallace Turnage
     * Bethany Veney
     * Booker T. Washington
     * Wallace Willis (19th century Indian Territory)
     * Harriet E. Wilson
     * Zamba Zembola (b. c. 1780 Congo)
     * See also Treatment of slaves in the US, Exodus narrative in
       Antebellum America, Slavery among the indigenous peoples of the
       Americas

   Books
   Non-fiction
     * The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano (1789)
     * The Narrative of Robert Adams (1816)
     * Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave
       (1845)
     * The Life of Josiah Henson (1849)
     * Twelve Years a Slave (1853)
     * My Bondage and My Freedom (1855)
     * Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (1861)
     * The Underground Railroad Records (1872)
     * Up from Slavery (1901)
     * The Slave Community (1972)

   Fiction
     * Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852)
     * The Heroic Slave (1852)
     * Clotel (1853)
     * Dred: A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp (1856)
     * The Bondwoman's Narrative (1853?-1861?)
     * Our Nig (1859)
     * Confessions of Nat Turner (1967)
     * Jubilee (1966)
     * Roots: The Saga of an American Family (1976)
     * Underground to Canada (1977)
     * Kindred (1979)
     * Dessa Rose (1986)
     * Beloved (1987)
     * Middle Passage (1990)
     * Queen: The Story of an American Family (1993)
     * Walk Through Darkness (2002)
     * The Known World (2003)
     * Unburnable (2006)
     * The Book of Negroes (2007)

   Child / Young adult
     * I, Juan de Pareja (1965)
     * The Slave-girl from Jerusalem (2007)

   Essay
     * To a Southern Slaveholder (1848)
     * A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin (1853)

   Related
     * African-American literature
     * Caribbean literature
     * Films featuring slavery
     * Songs of the Underground Railroad
     * Slave songs

   Documentaries
     * Frederick Douglass and the White Negro (2008)
     * Unchained Memories (2003)


           * v
     * t
     * e

   History of the United States
   Timeline
              * Prehistory
              * Pre-Columbian
              * Colonial
              * 1776–89
              * 1789–1849
              * 1849–65
              * 1865–1918
              * 1918–45
              * 1945–64
              * 1964–80
              * 1980–91
              * 1991–present

    Topics
              * African American
              * Asian American
              * Cities
              * Demographic
              * Diplomatic
              * Economic
              * Education
              * Immigration
              * Indian American
              * Jewish
              * Medical
              * Merchant Marine
              * Mexican American
              * Military
              * Musical
              * Native American
              * Polish
              * Religious
              * Southern
              * Stamps
              * Technological and industrial
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Women

     * Category Category
     * Portal Portal

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abolitionism_in_the_United_S
   tates&oldid=626006976"
   Categories:
     * Abolitionism in the United States
     * Slavery in the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007
     * Use dmy dates from May 2012

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Français
     * Русский
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 17 September 2014 at 22:36.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
