   #alternate Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia Atom feed

United States Constitution

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
     (Redirected from Constitution of the United States)
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Page semi-protected
                   United States Constitution
   Constitution of the United States, page 1.jpg
   Page one of the original copy of the Constitution
     Created   September 17, 1787
    Ratified   June 21, 1788
    Location   National Archives,
               Washington, D.C.
    Author(s)  Philadelphia Convention
   Signatories 39 of the 55 delegates
     Purpose   To replace the Articles of Confederation (1777)
   United States of America
   Great Seal of the United States
   This article is part a series on the
                      United States Constitution
                         Preamble and Articles
   of the Constitution
     * Preamble

     * I
     * II
     * III
     * IV
     * V
     * VI
     * VII

                    Amendments to the Constitution
     * Ratified Amendments
       The first ten Amendments are collectively known as the Bill of
       Rights

     * I
     * II
     * III
     * IV
     * V
     * VI
     * VII
     * VIII
     * IX
     * X
     * XI
     * XII
     * XIII
     * XIV
     * XV
     * XVI
     * XVII
     * XVIII
     * XIX
     * XX
     * XXI
     * XXII
     * XXIII
     * XXIV
     * XXV
     * XXVI
     * XXVII

     * Unratified Amendments

     * Congressional Apportionment
     * Titles of Nobility
     * Corwin
     * Child Labor
     * Equal Rights
     * D.C. Voting Rights

                     Full text of the Constitution
   and Amendments
     * Preamble & Articles I–VII
     * Amendments I–X
     * Amendments XI–XXVII
     * Unratified Amendments

     * US Government Portal
     * Law Portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

                   United States
   Great Seal of the United States (obverse).svg
   This article is part of a series on the
   politics and government of
   the United States
   Federal government
     * Constitution
     * Law
     * Taxation

   Legislature
     * Congress
          + House
               o Speaker
               o Party leaders
               o Congressional districts
          + Senate
               o President pro tempore
               o Party leaders

   Executive
     * President
     * Vice President
     * Cabinet
     * Federal agencies

   Judiciary
     * Supreme Court
     * Courts of Appeals
     * District Courts
     * Other tribunals

   Elections
     * Presidential elections
     * Midterm elections
     * Off-year elections

   Political parties
     * Democratic
     * Republican
     * Third parties

   Federalism
     * State government
          + Governors
          + Legislatures (List)
          + State courts
     * Local government

     * Other countries
     * Atlas

   Portal icon Politics portal
     * v
     * t
     * e

   The Constitution of the United States is the supreme law of the United
   States of America.^[1] The Constitution, originally comprising seven
   articles, delineates the national frame of government. Its first three
   articles entrench the doctrine of the separation of powers, whereby the
   federal government is divided into three branches: the legislative,
   consisting of the bicameral Congress; the executive, consisting of the
   President; and the judicial, consisting of the Supreme Court and other
   federal courts. Articles Four, Five and Six entrench concepts of
   federalism, describing the rights and responsibilities of state
   governments and of the states in relationship to the federal
   government. Article Seven establishes the procedure subsequently used
   by the thirteen States to ratify it.

   Since the Constitution came into force in 1789, it has been amended
   twenty-seven times.^[2] In general, the first ten amendments, known
   collectively as the Bill of Rights can be seen as addressing two major
   concerns: protecting or safeguarding individual liberty and justice,
   and the balance of power between the federal government and the states
   and the people within. Subsequent amendments cover many subjects. The
   majority of the seventeen later amendments stem from continued efforts
   to expand individual civil rights, while others address issues related
   to federal authority or modify government processes and procedures.
   Amendments to the US Constitution, unlike ones made to many
   constitutions world-wide, are appended to the end of the document.
   Structurally, the Constitution's original text and all prior amendments
   remain untouched. The precedent for this practice was set in 1789, when
   Congress considered and proposed the first several Constitutional
   amendments–the Bill of Rights. At seven articles and twenty-seven
   amendments, it is the shortest written constitution in force.^[3]

   The Constitution is interpreted, supplemented, and implemented by a
   large body of constitutional law. The Constitution of the United States
   was the first constitution of its kind, and has influenced the
   constitutions of other nations.

Contents

     * 1 Historical context
          + 1.1 First government
          + 1.2 Articles of Confederation
     * 2 Drafting
     * 3 Ratification
     * 4 Influences
          + 4.1 Fundamental law
          + 4.2 Native Americans
          + 4.3 Other bills of rights
     * 5 Original frame
          + 5.1 Preamble
          + 5.2 Article One
          + 5.3 Article Two
          + 5.4 Article Three
          + 5.5 Article Four
          + 5.6 Article Five
          + 5.7 Article Six
          + 5.8 Article Seven
     * 6 Ratified amendments
          + 6.1 Safeguards of liberty (Amendments 1, 2, 3)
          + 6.2 Safeguards of justice (Amendments 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
          + 6.3 Unenumerated rights and reserved powers (Amendments 9, 10)
          + 6.4 Governmental authority (Amendments 11, 16, 18, 21)
          + 6.5 Safeguards of civil rights (Amendments 13, 14, 15, 19, 23,
            24, 26)
          + 6.6 Government processes and procedures (Amendments 12, 17,
            20, 22, 25, 27)
     * 7 Unratified amendments
          + 7.1 Still pending
          + 7.2 No longer pending
     * 8 Judicial review
          + 8.1 Scope and theory
          + 8.2 Establishment
               o 8.2.1 Self-restraint
               o 8.2.2 Separation of powers
          + 8.3 Subsequent Courts
     * 9 Civic religion
     * 10 Worldwide influence
     * 11 Criticisms
     * 12 See also
     * 13 Notes
     * 14 References
          + 14.1 Footnotes
          + 14.2 Works cited
     * 15 Further reading
     * 16 External links

Historical context

   See also: History of the United States Constitution

First government

   From September 5, 1774 to March 1, 1781, the Continental Congress
   functioned as the provisional government of the United States.
   Delegates to the First (1774) and then the Second (1775-1781)
   Continental Congress were chosen by different methods, but largely
   through the action of committees of correspondence in various colonies
   rather than through the colonial or later state legislatures. In no
   formal sense was it a gathering representative of existing colonial
   governments; it represented the people, the dissatisfied elements of
   the people, such persons as were sufficiently interested to act,
   despite the strenuous opposition of the loyalists and the obstruction
   or disfavor of colonial governors.^[4] The process of selecting the
   delegates for the First and Second Continental Congresses underscores
   the revolutionary role of the people of the colonies in establishing a
   central governing body. Endowed by the people collectively, the
   Continental Congress alone possessed those attributes of external
   sovereignty which entitled it to be called a state in the international
   sense, while the separate states, exercising a limited or internal
   sovereignty, may rightly be considered a creation of the Continental
   Congress, which preceded them and brought them into being.^[5]

Articles of Confederation

   Main article: Articles of Confederation

   The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union was the first
   constitution of the United States.^[6] It was drafted by the Second
   Continental Congress from mid-1776 through late-1777, and ratification
   by all 13 states was completed in early 1781. Under the Articles of
   Confederation, the central government's power was kept quite limited.
   The Confederation Congress could make decisions, but lacked enforcement
   powers. Implementation of most decisions, including modifications to
   the Articles, required unanimous approval of all thirteen state
   legislatures.^[7]

   Although in a way, the Congressional powers in Article 9 made the
   "league of states as cohesive and strong as any similar sort of
   republican confederation in history,”^[8] the chief problem with the
   new government under the Articles of Confederation was, in the words of
   George Washington, "no money."^[9] The Continental Congress could print
   money; but, by 1786, the currency was worthless. (A popular phrase of
   the times chimed that a useless object or person was .. not worth a
   Continental, referring to the Continental dollar.) Congress could
   borrow money, but couldn't pay it back.^[9] No state paid all their
   U.S. taxes; Georgia paid nothing, as did New Jersey in 1785. Some few
   paid an amount equal to interest on the national debt owed to their
   citizens, but no more.^[9] No interest was paid on debt owed foreign
   governments. By 1786, the United States would default on outstanding
   debts as their dates came due.^[9]

   Internationally, the Articles of Confederation did little to enhance
   the United States' ability to defend its sovereignty as an independent
   nation. Most of the troops in the 625-man U.S. Army were deployed
   facing—but not threatening—British forts being maintained on American
   soil. Those troops had not been paid; some were deserting and others
   threatening mutiny.^[10] Spain closed New Orleans to American commerce;
   U.S. officials protested, to no effect. Barbary Pirates began seizing
   American ships of commerce; the Treasury had no funds to pay the
   pirates' extortionate demands. If any extant or new military crisis
   required action the Congress had no credit or taxing power to finance a
   response.^[9]

   Domestically, the Articles of Confederation was proving inadequate to
   the task of bringing unity to the diverse sentiments and interests of
   the various states. Although the Treaty of Paris (1783) was signed
   between Great Britain and the United States and each of the states by
   name, the various individual states proceeded blithely to violate it.
   New York and South Carolina repeatedly prosecuted Loyalists for wartime
   activity and redistributed their lands over the protests of both Great
   Britain and the Confederation Congress.^[9] Individual state
   legislatures independently laid embargoes, negotiated directly with
   foreigners, raised armies and made war, all violating the letter and
   the spirit of the Articles.

   During Shays' Rebellion in Massachusetts, Congress could provide no
   money to support an endangered constituent state. Nor could
   Massachusetts pay for its own internal defense; General Benjamin
   Lincoln was obliged to raise funds from Boston merchants to pay for a
   volunteer army.^[11] During the next Convention, James Madison angrily
   questioned whether the Articles of Confederation was a binding compact
   or even a viable government. Connecticut paid nothing and "positively
   refused" to pay U.S. assessments for two years.^[12] A rumor had it
   that a "seditious party" of New York legislators had opened a
   conversation with the Viceroy of Canada. To the south, the British were
   said to be openly funding Creek Indian raids on white settlers in
   Georgia and adjacent territory. Savannah was fortified and the State of
   Georgia was under martial law.^[13]

   Congress was paralyzed. It could do nothing significant without nine
   states, and some legislation required all thirteen. When a state
   produced only one member in attendance, its vote was not counted. If a
   state's delegation were evenly divided, its vote could not be counted
   towards the nine-count requirement.^[14] The Articles Congress had
   "virtually ceased trying to govern."^[15] The vision of a "respectable
   nation" among nations seemed to be fading in the eyes of
   revolutionaries such as George Washington, Benjamin Franklin and Rufus
   King. Their dream of a republic, a nation without hereditary rulers,
   with power derived from the people in frequent elections, was in
   doubt.^[16]

   On February 21, 1787, the Confederation Congress called a convention of
   state delegates at Philadelphia to propose a plan of government.^[17]
   Unlike earlier attempts, the convention was not meant for new laws or
   piecemeal alterations, but for the "sole and express purpose of
   revising the Articles of Confederation". The convention was not limited
   to commerce; rather, it was intended to “render the federal
   constitution adequate to the exigencies of government and the
   preservation of the Union." The proposal might take effect when
   approved by Congress and the states.^[18]

Drafting

   Main article: Constitutional Convention (United States)
   Signing the Constitution, September 17, 1787

   On the appointed day, May 14, 1787, only the Virginia and Pennsylvania
   delegations were present. A quorum of seven states met and
   deliberations began on May 25. Eventually twelve states were
   represented; 74 delegates were named, 55 attended and 39 signed. The
   delegates were generally convinced that an effective central government
   with a wide range of enforceable powers must replace the weaker
   Congress established by the Articles of Confederation. The high quality
   of the delegates to the convention was remarkable. As Thomas Jefferson
   in Paris wrote to John Adams in London, "It really is an assembly of
   demigods." According to one view, the Framers embraced ambiguity in the
   constitutional text, since it allows for compromise and cooperation
   about broad concepts rather than specific circumstances.^[19]

   Delegates used two streams of intellectual tradition, and any one
   delegate could be found using both or a mixture depending on the
   subject under discussion: foreign affairs, the economy, national
   government, or federal relationships among the states. The Virginia
   Plan recommended a consolidated national government, generally favoring
   the most populated states. It used the philosophy of John Locke to rely
   on consent of the governed, Montesquieu for divided government, and
   Edward Coke to emphasize civil liberties. The New Jersey Plan generally
   favored the less populated states, using the philosophy of English
   Whigs such as Edmund Burke to rely on received procedure, and William
   Blackstone to emphasize sovereignty of the legislature.

   The Convention devolved into a "Committee of the Whole" to consider the
   fifteen propositions of the Virginia Plan in their numerical order.
   These discussions continued until June 13, when the Virginia
   resolutions in amended form were reported out of committee.

   All agreed to a republican form of government grounded in representing
   the people in the states. For the legislature, two issues were to be
   decided: how the votes were to be allocated among the states in the
   Congress, and how the representatives should be elected. The question
   was settled by the Connecticut Compromise or "Great Compromise". In the
   House, state power was to be based on population and the people would
   vote. In the Senate, state power was to be based on state legislature
   election, with two Senators generally to be elected by their respective
   state legislatures to better reflect the long term interests of the
   people living in each state.

   The Great Compromise ended the stalemate between "patriots" and
   "nationalists", leading to numerous other compromises in a spirit of
   accommodation. There were sectional interests to be balanced by the
   three-fifths compromise; reconciliation on Presidential term, powers,
   and method of selection; and jurisdiction of the federal judiciary.
   Debates on the Virginia resolutions continued. The 15 original
   resolutions had been expanded into 23.

   On July 24, a committee of five (John Rutledge (SC), Edmund Randolph
   (VA), Nathaniel Gorham (MA), Oliver Ellsworth (CT), and James Wilson
   (PA)) was elected to draft a detailed constitution. The Convention
   adjourned from July 26 to August 6 to await the report of this
   "Committee of Detail". Overall, the report of the committee conformed
   to the resolutions adopted by the Convention, adding some elements.

   From August 6 to September 10, the report of the committee of detail
   was discussed, section-by-section, and clause-by-clause. Details were
   attended to, and further compromises were effected. Toward the close of
   these discussions, on September 8, a "Committee of Style" of five was
   appointed. Its final version was taken up on Monday, September 17, at
   the Convention's final session. Several of the delegates were
   disappointed in the result, a makeshift series of unfortunate
   compromises. Some delegates left before the ceremony, and three others
   refused to sign. Of the thirty-nine signers, Benjamin Franklin summed
   up addressing the Convention, "There are several parts of this
   Constitution which I do not at present approve, but I am not sure I
   shall never approve them." He would accept the Constitution, "because I
   expect no better and because I am not sure that it is not the best."

   The advocates of the Constitution were anxious to obtain unanimous
   support of all twelve states represented in the Convention. Their
   accepted formula was "Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent of
   the States present." George Washington noted in his diary that night,
   the proposal was agreed to by eleven state delegations and the lone Mr.
   Hamilton for New York.

Ratification

   Transmitted to the Articles Congress then sitting in New York City, the
   Constitution was forwarded to the states by Congress recommending the
   ratification process outlined in the Constitution. Each state
   legislature was to call elections for a "Federal Convention" to ratify
   the Constitution. They expanded the franchise beyond the Constitutional
   requirement to more nearly embrace "the people". Eleven ratified
   initially, and all thirteen unanimously did so a year later. The
   Articles Congress certified eleven states' beginning the new
   government, and called the states to hold elections to begin operation.
   It then dissolved itself on March 4, 1789, the day the first session of
   the First Congress began. George Washington was inaugurated as
   President two months later.
   Territorial extent of the United States, 1790.

   It was within the power of the old congress to expedite or block the
   ratification of the new Constitution. The document that the
   Philadelphia Convention presented was technically only a revision of
   the Articles of Confederation. But the last article of the new
   instrument provided that when ratified by conventions in nine states
   (or 2/3 at the time), it should go into effect among the States so
   acting.

   Then followed an arduous process of ratification of the Constitution by
   specially constituted conventions. The need for only nine states was a
   controversial decision at the time, since the Articles of Confederation
   could only be amended by unanimous vote of all the states.

   Three members of the Convention—Madison, Gorham, and King—were also
   Members of Congress. They proceeded at once to New York, where Congress
   was in session, to placate the expected opposition. Aware of their
   vanishing authority, Congress, on September 28, after some debate,
   resolved unanimously to submit the Constitution to the States for
   action, "in conformity to the resolves of the Convention",^[20] but
   with no recommendation either for or against its adoption.

   Two parties soon developed, one in opposition, the Antifederalists, and
   one in support, the Federalists, of the Constitution, and the
   Constitution was debated, criticized, and expounded clause by clause.
   Hamilton, Madison, and Jay, under the name of Publius, wrote a series
   of commentaries, now known as the Federalist Papers, in support of the
   new instrument of government; however, the primary aim of the essays
   was for ratification in the state of New York, at that time a hotbed of
   anti-federalism. These commentaries on the Constitution, written during
   the struggle for ratification, have been frequently cited by the
   Supreme Court as an authoritative contemporary interpretation of the
   meaning of its provisions. The closeness and bitterness of the struggle
   over ratification as a result of the conferring of additional powers on
   the central government can scarcely be exaggerated. In some states,
   ratification was effected only after a bitter struggle in the state
   convention itself. In every state, the Federalists proved more united,
   and only they coordinated action between different states, as the
   Anti-federalists were localized and did not attempt to reach out to
   other states.^[citation needed]

   The Continental Congress—which still functioned at irregular
   intervals—passed a resolution on September 13, 1788, to put the new
   Constitution into operation with eleven states.^[21] North Carolina and
   Rhode Island ratified by May 1790.

Influences

Fundamental law

   This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (June 2012)
   Enlightenment and Rule of law
   John Locke by Herman Verelst.png
   John Locke
   Two Treatises of Government
   life, liberty and property

   Several ideas in the Constitution were new. These were associated with
   the combination of consolidated government along with federal
   relationships with constituent states.

   The due process clause of the Constitution was partly based on common
   law and on Magna Carta (1215), which had become a foundation of English
   liberty against arbitrary power wielded by a tyrant.

   Both the influence of Edward Coke and William Blackstone were evident
   at the Convention. In his Institutes of the Laws of England, Edward
   Coke interpreted Magna Carta protections and rights to apply not just
   to nobles, but to all British subjects. In writing the Virginia Charter
   of 1606, he enabled the King in Parliament to give those to be born in
   the colonies all rights and liberties as though they were born in
   England. William Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England were
   the most influential books on law in the new republic.

   British political philosopher John Locke following the Glorious
   Revolution was a major influence expanding on the contract theory of
   government advanced by Thomas Hobbes. Locke advanced the principle of
   consent of the governed in his Two Treatises of Government.
   Government's duty under a social contract among the sovereign people
   was to serve them by protecting their rights. These basic rights were
   life, liberty and property.

   Montesquieu emphasized the need for balanced forces pushing against
   each other to prevent tyranny (reflecting the influence of Polybius's
   2nd century BC treatise on the checks and balances of the Roman
   Republic). In his The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu argues that the
   separation of state powers should be by its service to the people's
   liberty: legislative, executive and judicial.

   Division of power in a republic was informed by the British experience
   with mixed government, as well as the study of republics ancient and
   modern. A substantial body of thought had been developed from the
   literature of republicanism in the United States, including work by
   John Adams and applied to the creation of state constitutions.

Native Americans

   The Iroquois nations' political confederacy and democratic government
   under the Great Law of Peace have been credited as influences on the
   Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.^[22]
   Relations had long been close, as from the beginning, the colonial
   English needed allies against New France. Prominent figures, such as
   Thomas Jefferson in colonial Virginia and Benjamin Franklin in colonial
   Pennsylvania, two colonies whose territorial claims extended into
   Iroquois territory, were involved with leaders of the New York-based
   Iroquois Confederacy.^[23]

   In the 1750s, at the Albany Congress, Franklin called for "some kind of
   union" of English colonies to effectively deal with Amerindian
   tribes.^[24] John Rutledge (SC) quoted Iroquoian law to the
   Constitutional Convention, "We, the people, to form a union, to
   establish peace, equity, and order..." ^[25]

   The Iroquois experience with confederacy was both a model and a
   cautionary tale. Their "Grand Council" had no coercive control over the
   constituent members, and decentralization of authority and power had
   frequently plagued the Six Nations since the coming of the Europeans.
   The governance adopted by the Iroquois suffered from "too much
   democracy" and the long term independence of the Iroquois confederation
   suffered from intrigues within each Iroquois nation.^[26]

   The 1787 United States had similar problems, with individual states
   making separate agreements with European and Amerindian nations apart
   from the Continental Congress. Without the Convention's proposed
   central government, the framers feared that the fate of the
   confederated Articles' United States would be the same as the Iroquois
   Confederacy.

Other bills of rights

   The United States Bill of Rights consists of the 10 amendments added to
   the Constitution in 1791, as supporters of the Constitution had
   promised critics during the debates of 1788.^[27] The English Bill of
   Rights (1689) was an inspiration for the American Bill of Rights. Both
   require jury trials, contain a right to keep and bear arms, prohibit
   excessive bail and forbid "cruel and unusual punishments." Many
   liberties protected by state constitutions and the Virginia Declaration
   of Rights were incorporated into the Bill of Rights.

Original frame

   "We the People", as it appears in an original copy of the Constitution.

   Neither the Convention which drafted the Constitution nor the Congress
   which sent it to the thirteen states for ratification in the fall of
   1787 gave it a lead caption. To fill this void, the document was most
   often titled "A frame of Government" when it was printed for the
   convenience of ratifying conventions and the information of the
   public.^[28] This Frame of Government consisted of a preamble, seven
   articles and a signed closing endorsement.

Preamble

   The Preamble to the Constitution sets out the origin, scope and purpose
   of the Constitution. Its origin and authority is in "We, the people of
   the United States". This echoes the Declaration of Independence. "One
   people" dissolved their connection with another, and assumed among the
   powers of the earth, a sovereign nation-state. The scope of the
   Constitution is twofold. First, "to form a more perfect Union" than had
   previously existed in the "perpetual Union" of the Articles of
   Confederation. Second, to "secure the blessings of liberty", which were
   to be enjoyed by not only the first generation, but for all who came
   after, "our posterity".^[29]

   It is an itemized social contract of democratic philosophy. It details
   how the more perfect union was to be carried out between the national
   government and the people. The people are to be provided justice, civil
   peace, common defense, those things of a general welfare that they
   could not provide themselves, and freedom. A government of "liberty and
   union, now and forever", unfolds when "We" begin and establish this
   Constitution.^[a]^[31]

Article One

   Article One describes the Congress, the legislative branch of the
   federal government. Section 1, reads, "All legislative powers herein
   granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall
   consist of a Senate and House of Representatives."

   The article establishes the manner of election and the qualifications
   of members of each body. Representatives must be at least 25 years old,
   be a citizen of the United States for seven years, and live in the
   state they represent. Senators must be at least 30 years old, be a
   citizen for nine years, and live in the state they represent.

   Article I, Section 8 enumerates the legislative powers, which include:

     To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying
     into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by
     this Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any
     department or officer thereof.

   Article I, Section 9 lists eight specific limits on congressional
   power.

   The United States Supreme Court has interpreted the Commerce Clause and
   the Necessary and Proper Clause in Article One to allow Congress to
   enact legislation that is neither expressly listed in the enumerated
   power nor expressly denied in the limitations on Congress. In McCulloch
   v. Maryland (1819), the Supreme Court read the Necessary and Proper
   Clause to permit the federal government to take action that would
   "enable [it] to perform the high duties assigned to it [by the
   Constitution] in the manner most beneficial to the people,"^[32] even
   if that action is not itself within the enumerated powers. Chief
   Justice Marshall clarified: "Let the end be legitimate, let it be
   within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are
   appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not
   prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution,
   are Constitutional."^[32]

Article Two

   Article Two describes the office of the President of the United States.
   The President is head of the executive branch of the federal
   government, as well as the nation's, head of state and head of
   government.

   The office of the Vice President is also established by Article Two.
   The Vice President and the President are both elected to serve an
   identical four year term. Section 1 specifies that the Vice President
   succeeds to the presidency if the President is removed, unable to
   discharge the powers and duties of office, dies while in office, or
   resigns. The later 25th Amendment clarifies this. Additionally, the
   original procedure (replaced in the Twelfth Amendment) for electing the
   President and Vice President is contained in this article.

   In order to qualify to serve as president, a person must be a natural
   born citizen of the United States or a citizen at the time of the
   adoption of the Constitution, at least 35 years old and a resident of
   the United States for at least 14 years.^[33] The first president to be
   born an American citizen was Martin Van Buren.^[34]

   The President receives Compensation, and this compensation may not be
   increased or decreased during the president's term in office. The
   president may not receive other compensation from either the United
   States or any of the individual states. Additionally, every President
   must take an oath when assuming office, prescribed here in the final
   clause of the First Section, to preserve, protect, and defend the
   Constitution.

   Section 2 grants substantive powers to the president:
     * The president is the Commander in Chief of the United States Armed
       Forces, and of the state militias when these are called into
       federal service.
     * The president may require opinions of the principal officers of the
       federal government.
     * The president may grant reprieves and pardons, except in cases of
       impeachment (i.e., the president cannot pardon himself or herself
       to escape impeachment by Congress).

   Section 2 grants and limits the president's appointment powers:
     * The president may make treaties, with the advice and consent of the
       Senate, provided two-thirds of the senators who are present agree.
     * With the advice and consent of the Senate, the President may
       appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of
       the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the United States
       whose appointments are not otherwise described in the Constitution.
     * Congress may give the power to appoint lower officers to the
       President alone, to the courts, or to the heads of departments.
     * The president may make any of these appointments during a
       congressional recess. Such a "recess appointment" expires at the
       end of the next session of Congress.

   Section 3 opens by describing the president's relations with Congress:
     * The president reports on the state of the union.
     * The Recommendation Clause:^[35] The president has the power and
       duty^[35] to recommend to Congress's consideration such measures
       which the president deems as "necessary and expedient".
     * The president may convene either house, or both houses, of
       Congress.
     * When the two houses of Congress cannot agree on the time of
       adjournment, the president may adjourn them to some future date.

   Section 3 adds:
     * The president receives ambassadors.
     * The president sees that the laws are faithfully executed.
     * The president commissions all the offices of the federal
       government.

   Section 4 provides for removal of the president and other federal
   officers. The president is removed on impeachment for, and conviction
   of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

Article Three

   Article Three describes the court system (the judicial branch),
   including the Supreme Court. There shall be one court called the
   Supreme Court. The article describes the kinds of cases the court takes
   as original jurisdiction. Congress can create lower courts and an
   appeals process. Congress enacts law defining crimes and providing for
   punishment. Article Three also protects the right to trial by jury in
   all criminal cases, and defines the crime of treason.

   Section 1 vests the judicial power of the United States in federal
   courts. and with it, the authority to interpret and apply the law to a
   particular case. Also included is the power to punish, sentence, and
   direct future action to resolve conflicts. The Constitution outlines
   the U.S. judicial system. In the Judiciary Act of 1789, Congress began
   to fill in details. Currently, Title 28 of the U.S. Code^[36] describes
   judicial powers and administration.

   As of the First Congress, the Supreme Court justices rode circuit to
   sit as panels to hear appeals from the district courts.^[b] In 1891,
   Congress enacted a new system. District courts would have original
   jurisdiction. Intermediate appellate courts (circuit courts) with
   exclusive jurisdiction heard regional appeals before consideration by
   the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court holds discretionary jurisdiction,
   meaning that it does not have to hear every case that is brought to
   it.^[36]

   To enforce judicial decisions, the Constitution grants federal courts
   both criminal contempt and civil contempt powers. The court’s summary
   punishment for contempt immediately overrides all other punishments
   applicable to the subject party. Other implied powers include
   injunctive relief and the habeas corpus remedy. The Court may imprison
   for contumacy, bad-faith litigation, and failure to obey a writ of
   mandamus. Judicial power includes that granted by Acts of Congress for
   rules of law and punishment. Judicial power also extends to areas not
   covered by statute. Generally, federal courts cannot interrupt state
   court proceedings.^[36]

   Clause 1 of Section 2 authorizes the federal courts to hear actual
   cases and controversies only. Their judicial power does not extend to
   cases which are hypothetical, or which are proscribed due to standing,
   mootness, or ripeness issues. Generally, a case or controversy requires
   the presence of adverse parties who have some interest genuinely at
   stake in the case. Also required is of broad enough concern in the
   Court’s jurisdiction that a lower court, either federal or state, does
   not geographically cover all the existing cases before law. Courts
   following these guidelines exercise judicial restraint. Those making an
   exception are said to be judicial activist.^[c]

   Clause 2 of Section 2 provides that the Supreme Court has original
   jurisdiction in cases involving ambassadors, ministers and consuls, for
   all cases respecting foreign nation-states,^[37] and also in those
   controversies which are subject to federal judicial power because at
   least one state is a party. Cases arising under the laws of the United
   States and its treaties come under the jurisdiction of federal courts.
   Cases under international maritime law and conflicting land grants of
   different states come under federal courts. Cases between U.S. citizens
   in different states, and cases between U.S. citizens and foreign states
   and their citizens, come under federal jurisdiction. The trials will be
   in the state where the crime was committed.^[36]

   No part of the Constitution expressly authorizes judicial review, but
   the Framers did contemplate the idea. The Constitution is the supreme
   law of the land. Precedent has since established that the courts could
   exercise judicial review over the actions of Congress or the executive
   branch. Two conflicting federal laws are under "pendent" jurisdiction
   if one presents a strict constitutional issue. Federal court
   jurisdiction is rare when a state legislature enacts something as under
   federal jurisdiction.^[d] To establish a federal system of national
   law, considerable effort goes into developing a spirit of comity
   between federal government and states. By the doctrine of 'Res
   judicata', federal courts give "full faith and credit" to State
   Courts.^[e] The Supreme Court will decide Constitutional issues of
   state law only on a case by case basis, and only by strict
   Constitutional necessity, independent of state legislators motives,
   their policy outcomes or its national wisdom.^[f]

   Section 3 bars Congress from changing or modifying Federal law on
   treason by simple majority statute. Treason is also defined in this
   section. It's not enough merely to think a treasonous thought, there
   must be an overt act of making war or materially helping those at war
   with the United States. Accusations must be corroborated by at least
   two witnesses. Congress is a political body and political disagreements
   routinely encountered should never be considered as treason. This
   allows for nonviolent resistance to the government because opposition
   is not a life or death proposition. However, Congress does provide for
   other less subversive crimes and punishments such as conspiracy.^[g]

Article Four

   Article Four outlines the relation between the states and the relation
   between each state and the federal government. In addition, it provides
   for such matters as admitting new states as well as border changes
   between the states. For instance, it requires states to give "full
   faith and credit" to the public acts, records, and court proceedings of
   the other states. Congress is permitted to regulate the manner in which
   proof of such acts, records, or proceedings may be admitted. The
   "privileges and immunities" clause prohibits state governments from
   discriminating against citizens of other states in favor of resident
   citizens (e.g., having tougher penalties for residents of Ohio
   convicted of crimes within Michigan).

   It also establishes extradition between the states, as well as laying
   down a legal basis for freedom of movement and travel amongst the
   states. Today, this provision is sometimes taken for granted,
   especially by citizens who live near state borders; but in the days of
   the Articles of Confederation, crossing state lines was often a much
   more arduous and costly process. Article Four also provides for the
   creation and admission of new states. The Territorial Clause gives
   Congress the power to make rules for disposing of federal property and
   governing non-state territories of the United States. Finally, the
   fourth section of Article Four requires the United States to guarantee
   to each state a republican form of government, and to protect the
   states from invasion and violence.

Article Five

   Article Five outlines the process for amending the Constitution. Eight
   state constitutions in effect in 1787 included an amendment mechanism.
   Amendment making power rested with the legislature in three of the
   states and in the other five it was given to specially elected
   conventions. The Articles of Confederation provided that amendments
   were to be proposed by Congress and ratified by the unanimous vote of
   all thirteen state legislatures. This proved to be a major flaw in the
   Articles, as it created an insurmountable obstacle to constitutional
   reform. The amendment process crafted during the Philadelphia
   Constitutional Convention was, according to The Federalist No. 43,
   designed to establish a balance between pliancy and rigidity:^[38]

     It guards equally against that extreme facility which would render
     the Constitution too mutable; and that extreme difficulty which
     might perpetuate its discovered faults. It moreover equally enables
     the General and the State Governments to originate the amendment of
     errors, as they may be pointed out by the experience on one side, or
     on the other.

   There are two steps in the amendment process. Proposals to amend the
   Constitution must be properly Adopted and Ratified before becoming
   operative.

          A proposed amendment may be adopted and sent to the states for
          ratification by either:

          + The United States Congress, whenever a two-thirds majority in
            both the Senate and the House of Representatives deem it
            necessary; OR,
          + A national convention, called by Congress for this purpose, on
            the application of the legislatures of two-thirds (presently
            34) of the states.

          To become part of the Constitution, an adopted amendment must be
          ratified by either (as determined by Congress):

          + The legislatures of three-fourths (presently 38) of the
            states; OR,
          + State ratifying conventions in three-fourths (presently 38) of
            the states.

   The decision of which ratification method will be used for any given
   amendment is Congress' alone to make.^[39] The latter procedure has
   been utilized only once, for the Twenty-first Amendment.^[40]

   Presently, the Archivist of the United States is charged with
   responsibility for administering the ratification process under the
   provisions of 1 U.S. Code § 106b. The Archivist submits the proposed
   amendment to the states for their consideration by sending a letter of
   notification to each Governor. Each Governor then formally submits the
   amendment to their state's legislature. When a state ratifies a
   proposed amendment, it sends the Archivist an original or certified
   copy of the state’s action. Ratification documents are examined by the
   Office of the Federal Register for facial legal sufficiency and an
   authenticating signature.^[41]

   Article Five ends by shielding certain clauses in the new frame of
   government from being amended. Article One, Section 9, Clauses 1
   prevents Congress from passing any law that would restrict the
   importation of slaves into the United States prior to 1808, plus the
   fourth clause from that same section, which reiterates the
   Constitutional rule that direct taxes must be apportioned according
   state populations. These clauses were explicitly shielded from
   Constitutional amendment prior to 1808. On January 1, 1808, the first
   day it was permitted to do so, Congress approved legislation
   prohibiting the importation of slaves into the country. On February 3,
   1913, with ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment, Congress gained the
   authority to levy an income tax without apportioning it among the
   states or basing it on the United States Census. The third textually
   entrenched provision is Article One, Section 3, Clauses 1, which
   provides for equal representation of the states in the Senate. The
   shield protecting this clause from the amendment process is less
   absolute—"no state, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal
   Suffrage in the Senate"—but permanent.

Article Six

   Article Six establishes the Constitution, and all federal laws and
   treaties of the United States made according to it, to be the supreme
   law of the land, and that "the judges in every state shall be bound
   thereby, any thing in the laws or constitutions of any state
   notwithstanding." It validates national debt created under the Articles
   of Confederation and requires that all federal and state legislators,
   officers, and judges take oaths or affirmations to support the
   Constitution. This means that the states' constitutions and laws should
   not conflict with the laws of the federal constitution and that in case
   of a conflict, state judges are legally bound to honor the federal laws
   and constitution over those of any state. Article Six also states "no
   religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office
   or public Trust under the United States."

Article Seven

   Article Seven describes the process for establishing the proposed new
   frame of government. Anticipating that the influence of many state
   politicians would be Antifederalist, delegates to the Philadelphia
   Convention provided for ratification of the Constitution by popularly
   elected ratifying conventions in each state. The convention method also
   made it possible that judges, ministers and others ineligible to serve
   in state legislatures, could be elected to a convention. Suspecting
   that Rhode Island, at least, might not ratify, delegates decided that
   the Constitution would go into effect as soon as nine states
   (two-thirds rounded up) ratified.^[42] Once ratified by this minimum
   number of states, it was anticipated that the proposed Constitution
   would become this Constitution between the nine or more that signed. It
   would not cover the four or fewer states that might not have
   signed.^[43]

Ratified amendments

                        United States Bill of Rights
                 Currently housed in the National Archives.

   See also: List of amendments to the United States Constitution

   The Constitution has twenty-seven amendments. Among these, Amendments
   1–10 are collectively known as the Bill of Rights, and Amendments 13–15
   are known as the Reconstruction Amendments. Excluding the
   Twenty-seventh Amendment, which was pending before the states for
   7002202000000000000202 years, 7002225000000000000225 days, the longest
   pending amendment that was successfully ratified was the Twenty-second
   Amendment, which took 70003000000000000003 years,
   7002343000000000000343 days. The Twenty-sixth Amendment was ratified in
   the shortest time, 100 days. The average ratification time for the
   first twenty-six amendments was 1 year, 252 days, for all twenty-seven,
   9 years, 48 days.

   A proposed amendment becomes an operative part of the Constitution as
   soon as it is ratified by three-fourths of the States (currently 38 of
   the 50 States). There is no further step. The text requires no
   additional action by Congress or anyone else after ratification by the
   final state. ^[44] Thus, when the Office of the Federal Register
   verifies that it has received the required number of authenticated
   ratification documents, it drafts a formal proclamation for the
   Archivist to certify that the amendment is valid and has become part of
   the nation's frame of government. This certification is published in
   the Federal Register Federal Register and United States Statutes at
   Large and serves as official notice to Congress and to the nation that
   the ratification process has been successfully completed.^[41]

Safeguards of liberty (Amendments 1, 2, 3)

   The First Amendment (1791) prohibits Congress from obstructing the
   exercise of certain individual freedoms: freedom of religion, freedom
   of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and freedom of
   petition. Its free exercise clause guarantees a person’s right to hold
   whatever religious beliefs he or she wants, and to freely exercise that
   belief, and its establishment clause prevents the federal government
   from creating an official national church or favoring one set of
   religious beliefs over another. The amendment guarantees an
   individual’s right to express and to be exposed to a wide range of
   opinions and views. It was intended to ensure a free exchange of ideas
   even if the ideas are unpopular. It also guarantees an individual’s
   right to physically gather with a group of people to picket or protest;
   or associate with others in groups for economic, political or religious
   purposes. Additionally, it guarantees an individual’s right to petition
   the government for a redress of grievances.^[45]

   The Second Amendment (1791) protects the right of individuals^[46]^[47]
   to keep and bear arms.^[48]^[49]^[50]^[51] Although the Supreme Court
   has ruled that this right applies to individuals, not merely to
   collective militias, it has also held that the government may regulate
   or place some limits on the manufacturer, ownership and sale of
   firearms or similar devices.^[52]^[53] Requested by several states
   during the Constitutional ratification debates, the widespread desire
   for such an amendment reflected the lingering resentment over the
   widespread efforts of the British to confiscate the colonists’ firearms
   at the outbreak of the Revolutionary War. Patrick Henry had
   rhetorically asked, shall we be stronger, "when we are totally
   disarmed, and when a British Guard shall be stationed in every
   house?"^[54]

   The Third Amendment (1791) prohibits the federal government from
   forcing individuals to provide lodging to soldiers in their homes
   during peacetime without their consent. Requested by several states
   during the Constitutional ratification debates, the widespread desire
   for such an amendment reflected the lingering resentment over the
   Quartering Acts passed by the British Parliament during the
   Revolutionary War, which had allowed British soldiers to take over
   private homes for their own use.^[55]

Safeguards of justice (Amendments 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)

   The Fourth Amendment (1791) protects people against unreasonable
   searches and seizures of either self or property by government
   officials. A search can mean everything from a frisking by a police
   officer or to a demand for a blood test to a search of an individual’s
   home or car. A seizure occurs when the government takes control of an
   individual or something in his or her possession. Items that are seized
   often are used as evidence when the individual is charged with a crime.
   It also imposes certain limitations on police investigating a crime and
   prevents the use of illegally obtained evidence at trial.^[56]

   The Fifth Amendment (1791) establishes a requirement that a trials for
   a major crime may commence only after an indictment has been handed
   down by a grand jury; protects individuals from double jeopardy, being
   tried and put in danger of being punished more than once for the same
   criminal act; prohibits punishment without due process of law, thus
   protecting individuals from being imprisoned without fair procedures;
   and provides that an accused person may not be compelled to reveal to
   the police, prosecutor, judge, or jury any information that might
   incriminate or be used against him or her in a court of law.
   Additionally, the Fifth Amendment also prohibits government from taking
   private property for public use without "just compensation", the basis
   of eminent domain in the United States.^[57]

   The Sixth Amendment (1791) provides several protections and rights to
   an individual accused of a crime. A person has the right to have his or
   her case heard by an impartial jury composed of people from the
   surrounding community who are willing to decide the case based only on
   the evidence. A person has the right to a speedy trial, as without one,
   a defendant could be held indefinitely under a cloud of unproven
   criminal accusations. The right to a speedy trial is crucial to
   assuring that a criminal defendant receives a fair trial, which is also
   their right. If too much time elapses between the alleged crime and the
   trial, witnesses may die or leave the area, their memories may fade,
   and physical evidence may be lost. Likewise, a person has the right to
   a public trial. This right protects defendants from secret proceedings
   that might encourage abuse of the justice system, and serves to keep
   the public informed about how the criminal justice system works. This
   amendment also guarantees an individual’s right to legal counsel if
   accused of a crime, guarantees that the accused may require witnesses
   to attend the trial and testify in the presence of the accused, and
   guarantees the accused a right to know the charges against them. In
   1966, the Supreme Court ruled that the Fifth Amendment prohibition on
   forced self-incrimination and the Sixth Amendment clause on right to
   counsel were to be made known to all persons placed under arrest,
   giving rise to what has become known as the ‘’Miranda warning’’.^[58]

   The Seventh Amendment (1791) extends the right to a jury trial to
   federal civil cases, and inhibits courts from overturning a jury's
   findings of fact. Although the Seventh Amendment itself says that it is
   limited to “suits at common law,” meaning cases that triggered the
   right to a jury under English law, the amendment has been found to
   apply in lawsuits that are similar to the old common law cases. For
   example, the right to a jury trial applies to cases brought under
   federal statutes that prohibit race or gender discrimination in housing
   or employment. Importantly, this amendment guarantees the right to a
   jury trial only in federal court, not in state court.^[59]

   The Eighth Amendment (1791) protects people from having bail or fines
   set at an amount so high that it would be impossible for all but the
   richest defendants to pay and also protects people from being subjected
   to cruel and unusual punishment. Although this phrase originally was
   intended to outlaw certain gruesome methods of punishment, it has been
   broadened over the years to protect against punishments that are
   grossly disproportionate to or too harsh for the particular crime. This
   provision has also been used to challenge prison conditions such as
   extremely unsanitary cells, overcrowding, insufficient medical care and
   deliberate failure by officials to protect inmates from one
   another.^[60]

Unenumerated rights and reserved powers (Amendments 9, 10)

   The Ninth Amendment (1791) declares that individuals have other
   fundamental rights, in addition to those stated in the Constitution.
   During the Constitutional ratification debates Anti-Federalists argued
   that a Bill of Rights should be added. One of the arguments the
   Federalists gave against the addition of a Bill of Rights was that,
   because it was impossible to list every fundamental right, it would be
   dangerous to list just some of them, for fear of suggesting that the
   list was explicit and exhaustive, thus enlarging the power of the
   federal government by implication. The Anti-Federalists persisted in
   favor of a Bill of Rights, and consequently several state ratification
   conventions refused to ratify the Constitution without a more specific
   list of protections, so the First Congress added what became the Ninth
   Amendment as a compromise. Because the rights protected by the Ninth
   Amendment are not specified, they are referred to as “unenumerated.”
   The Supreme Court has found that unenumerated rights include such
   important rights as the right to travel, the right to vote, the right
   to keep personal matters private and to make important decisions about
   one’s health care or body.^[61]

   The Tenth Amendment (1791) was included in the Bill of Rights to
   further define the balance of power between the federal government and
   the states. The amendment states that the federal government has only
   those powers specifically granted by the Constitution. These powers
   include the power to declare war, to collect taxes, to regulate
   interstate business activities and others that are listed in the
   articles or in subsequent constitutional amendments. Any power not
   listed is, says the Tenth Amendment, left to the states or the people.
   While there is no specific list of what these “reserved powers” may be,
   the Supreme Court has ruled that laws affecting family relations,
   commerce that occurs within a state’s own borders, and local law
   enforcement activities, are among those specifically reserved to the
   states or the people.^[62]

Governmental authority (Amendments 11, 16, 18, 21)

   The Eleventh Amendment (1795) specifically prohibits federal courts
   from hearing cases in which a state is sued by an individual from
   another state or another country, thus extending to the states
   sovereign immunity protection from certain types of legal liability.
   Article Three, Section 2, Clause 1 has been affected by this amendment,
   which also overturned the Supreme Court’s decision in Chisholm v.
   Georgia.^[63]^[64]

   The Sixteenth Amendment (1913) removed existing Constitutional
   constraints that limited the power of Congress to lay and collect
   direct taxes on income. Specifically, the apportionment constraints
   delineated in Article 1, Section 9, Clause 4 have been removed by this
   amendment, which also overturned an 1895 Supreme Court decision, in
   Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co., that declared a federal income
   taxe on rents, dividends, and interest unconstitutional. This amendment
   has become the basis for all subsequent federal income tax legislation
   and has greatly expanded the scope of federal taxing and spending in
   the years since.^[65]

   The Eighteenth Amendment (1919) prohibited the making, transporting,
   and selling of alcoholic beverages nationwide. It also authorized
   Congress to enact legislation enforcing this prohibition. Adopted at
   the urging of a national temperance movement, proponents believed that
   the use of alcohol was reckless and destructive and that prohibition
   would reduce crime and corruption, solve social problems, decrease the
   need for welfare and prisons, and improve the health of all Americans.
   During prohibition, it is estimated that alcohol consumption and
   alcohol related deaths declined dramatically. But prohibition had
   other, more negative consequences. The amendment drove the lucrative
   alcohol business underground, giving rise to a large and pervasive
   black market. In addition, prohibition encouraged disrespect for the
   law and strengthened organized crime. Prohibition came to an end in
   1933, when this amendment was repealed.^[66]

   The Twenty-first Amendment (1933) repealed the Eighteenth Amendment and
   returned the regulation of alcohol to the states. Each state sets its
   own rules for the sale and importation of alcohol, including the
   drinking age. Because a federal law provides federal funds to states
   that prohibit the sale of alcohol to minors under the age of
   twenty-one, all fifty states have set their drinking age there. Rules
   about how alcohol is sold vary greatly from state to state.^[67]

Safeguards of civil rights (Amendments 13, 14, 15, 19, 23, 24, 26)

   The Thirteenth Amendment (1865) abolished slavery and involuntary
   servitude, except as punishment for a crime, and authorized Congress to
   enforce abolition through legislation. Though three–four million slaves
   had been declared free by President Abraham Lincoln's 1863 Emancipation
   Proclamation, their post Civil War status was unclear, as was the
   status of millions of other slaves nationwide.^[68] Congress intended
   the Thirteenth Amendment to be a proclamation of freedom for all slaves
   throughout the nation and to take the question of emancipation away
   from politics. A portion of Article 1, Section 2, clause 3 became
   inoperative and Article 4 Section 2 Clause 3 rendered mostly moot by
   this amendment, which the Supreme Court has interpreted broadly to
   forbid work forced by the use or threat of physical restraint or injury
   or through law.^[69]

   The Fourteenth Amendment (1868) granted United States citizenship to
   former slaves and to all persons "subject to U.S. jurisdiction". It
   also contained three new limits on state power: a state shall not
   violate a citizen’s privileges or immunities; shall not deprive any
   person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law; and
   must guarantee all persons equal protection of the laws. These
   limitations dramatically expanded the protections of the Constitution.
   Prior to the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, the protections in
   the Bill of Rights limited only the actions of the federal government,
   unless the provision specifically stated otherwise. This amendment,
   according to the Supreme Court's Doctrine of Incorporation, makes most
   provisions of the Bill of Rights applicable to state and local
   governments as well. The mode of apportionment of representatives
   delineated in Article 1, Section 2, Clause 3 has been superseded by
   that of this amendment, which also overturned the Supreme Court’s
   decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford.^[70]

   The Fifteenth Amendment (1870) prohibits the use of race, color, or
   previous condition of servitude in determining which citizens may vote.
   The last of three post Civil War Reconstruction Amendments, it sought
   to abolish one of the key vestiges of slavery and to advance the civil
   rights and liberties of former slaves.^[71]

   The Nineteenth Amendment (1920) prohibits the government from denying
   women the right to vote on the same terms as men. Prior to the
   amendment’s adoption, only a few states permitted women to vote and to
   hold office. With its ratification, this right was extended to all
   women nation wide.^[72]

   The Twenty-third Amendment (1961) extends the right to vote in
   presidential elections to citizens residing in the District of Columbia
   by granting the District electors in the Electoral College, as if it
   were a state (but no more than the smallest state). When first
   established as the nation’s capital in 1800, the district had a small
   population of only five thousand residents. As a federal territory,
   however, and not a state, the inhabitants had neither a local
   government, nor the right to vote in federal elections. Although by
   1960 the population of the District of Columbia had grown to over
   760,000 people, and the District’s residents had all the
   responsibilities of citizenship—they were required to pay federal taxes
   and could be drafted to serve in the military—citizens in thirteen
   states with lower populations had more voting rights than District
   residents. Because of this amendment, citizens living in the district
   are no longer shut out from the Presidential–Vice Presidential election
   process.^[73]

   The Twenty-fourth Amendment (1964) prohibits the government from
   imposing a poll tax–a state imposed fee for voting. Although passage of
   the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments helped remove many
   of the discriminatory laws left over from slavery, they did not
   eliminate all forms of discrimination. Along with literacy tests and
   durational residency requirements, poll taxes were used to keep
   low-income (primarily African American) citizens from participating in
   elections. The Supreme Court has since struck down these discriminatory
   measures, opening democratic participation to all, regardless of one’s
   ability to pay.^[74]

   The Twenty-sixth Amendment (1971) prohibits the government from denying
   the right of US citizens, eighteen years of age or older, to vote on
   account of age. The drive to lower the voting age from 21 to 18 grew
   across the country during the 1960s, driven in large part by the
   broader student activism movement protesting the Vietnam War. The
   momentum behind it gained strength following the Supreme Court's
   decision in Oregon v. Mitchell, which held that Congress may set
   requirements for voting in federal elections, but not for state or
   local elections. The measure, which overturns overturns the Mitchell
   decision, is another in a line of constitutional changes that expanded
   the right to vote to more citizens.^[75]

Government processes and procedures (Amendments 12, 17, 20, 22, 25, 27)

   The Twelfth Amendment (1804) modifies the way the Electoral College
   chooses the President and Vice President of the United States. The
   amendment stipulates that each elector must cast a distinct vote for
   President and Vice President, instead of two votes for President. It
   also suggests strongly that the President and Vice President should not
   be from the same state, as it prohibits the electors from that state
   from voting for both offices. The electoral process delineated by
   Article II, Section 1, Clause 3 has been superseded by that of this
   amendment, which also extends the eligibility requirements to become
   President to the Vice President.^[76]

   The Seventeenth Amendment (1913) modifies the way that United States
   senators are elected. The amendment stipulates that senators are to be
   elected by direct popular vote. The amendment supersedes Article 1,
   Section 2, Clauses 1and 2, under which the two senators from each state
   were elected by the state legislature of each state. Under this scheme
   senators represented the states to the federal Union. It also alters
   the procedure for filling vacancies in the Senate, allowing for state
   legislatures to permit their governors to make temporary appointments
   until a special election can be held.^[77]

   The Twentieth Amendment (1933) changes the date on which both a new
   President, Vice President and Congress take office, thus reducing the
   amount of time between Election Day and the beginning of Presidential,
   Vice Presidential and Congressional terms.^[78] Originally, the
   Constitution provided that the annual meeting was to be on the first
   Monday in December unless otherwise provided by law. The government
   under the Articles of Confederation had determined, as a transitional
   measure to the new constitution, that the date for "commencing
   proceedings" under the U.S. Constitution would be March 4, 1789.^[79]
   Since the first term of the original federal officials began on this
   date and ended 2, 4, or 6 years later, this became the date on which
   new federal officials took office in subsequent years. This meant that,
   every other year, although a new Congress was elected in November, it
   did not come into office until the following March, with a "lame duck"
   Congress convening in the interim. However, as transportation and
   communications improved, this meant that the departing Congress and
   president would remain in office for an unnecessarily long time
   following the November elections. By moving the beginning of the
   president’s new term from March 4 to January 20 (and in the case of
   Congress, to January 3), proponents of the Constitutional change hoped
   to put an end to lame duck sessions, while at the same time allowing
   for a speedier transition for the new administration and
   legislators.^[80]

   The Twenty-second Amendment (1951) limits an elected president to two
   terms in office, a total of eight years. However, it is possible for an
   individual to serve up to ten years as president. The amendment
   specifies that if a vice president or other successor takes over for a
   president—who, for whatever reason, cannot fulfill the term—and serves
   two years or less of the former president’s term, the new president may
   serve for two full four-year terms. If more than two years remain of
   the term when the successor assumes office, the new president may serve
   only one additional term. Although nothing in the original frame of
   government limited how many presidential terms one could serve, the
   nation’s first president, George Washington, declined to run for a
   third term, suggesting that two terms of four years were enough for any
   president. The "two terms and out" precedent established by Washington
   remained an unwritten rule of the presidency until broken by Franklin
   D. Roosevelt, who was elected to a third term as president 1940 and in
   1944 to a fourth.^[81]

   The Twenty-fifth Amendment (1967) clarifies what happens upon the
   death, removal, or resignation of the President or Vice President and
   how the Presidency is temporarily filled if the President becomes
   disabled and cannot fulfill the responsibilities of the office. It
   supersedes the ambiguous succession rule established in Article II,
   Section 1, Clause 6, which does not expressly state whether the Vice
   President becomes the President, as opposed to an Acting President, if
   the President dies, resigns, is removed from office or is otherwise
   unable to discharge the powers of the presidency. Neither does it
   provide for filling the Vice Presidency if that office becomes vacant.
   A plan of succession has frequently been necessary. Eight presidents
   have died in office and one resigned from office mid-term. Similarly,
   seven vice presidents have died in office and two resigned mid-term.
   This has meant that for nearly 20% of U.S. history, there has been no
   Vice-President in office who can assume the Presidency.^[82]

   The Twenty-seventh Amendment (1992) prevents members of Congress from
   granting themselves pay raises during the current session. Rather, any
   raises that are adopted must take effect during the next session of
   Congress. Its proponents believed that Federal legislators would be
   more likely to be cautious about increasing congressional pay if they
   have no personal stake in the vote. Article One, section 6, Clause 1
   has been affected by this amendment, which remained pending for over
   two centuries as it contained no time limit for ratification.^[83]

Unratified amendments

   Collectively, members of the House and Senate typically propose around
   200 amendments during each two–year term of Congress.^[84] Most
   however, never get out of the Congressional committees in which they
   were proposed, and only a fraction of those that do receive enough
   support to win Congressional approval to actually go through the
   constitutional ratification process.

   Six amendments approved by Congress and proposed to the states for
   consideration have not been ratified by the required number of states
   to become part of the Constitution. Four of these are technically still
   pending, as Congress did not set a time limit (see also Coleman v.
   Miller) for their ratification. The other two are no longer pending, as
   both had a time limit attached and in both cases the time period set
   for their ratification expired.

Still pending

   The Congressional Apportionment Amendment (proposed 1789) would, if
   ratified, establish a formula for determining the appropriate size of
   the House of Representatives and the appropriate apportionment of
   representatives among the states following each constitutionally
   mandated decennial census. At the time it was sent to the states for
   ratification, an affirmative vote by ten states would have made this
   amendment operational. That number rose to eleven on March 4, 1791,
   when Vermont joined the Union. By the end of 1791, the amendment was
   only one state short of the mark. However, when Kentucky attained
   statehood on June 1, 1792, the number climbed to twelve. Thus, even
   though Kentucky ratified it that summer (along with the other eleven
   amendments), the amendment remained one state shy of the number needed
   for it to become part of the Constitution. No additional states have
   ratified this amendment since. To become part of the Constitution
   today, ratification by an additional twenty-seven would be required.
   The Apportionment Act of 1792 apportioned the House of Representatives
   at 33,000 persons per representative in consequence of the 1790 census.
   Reapportionment has since been effected by statute.

   The Titles of Nobility Amendment (proposed 1810) would, if ratified,
   strip United States citizenship from any citizen who accepted a title
   of nobility from a foreign country. When submitted to the states,
   ratification by thirteen states was required for it to become part of
   the Constitution; eleven had done so by early 1812. However, with the
   addition of Louisiana into the Union that year (April 30, 1812), the
   ratification threshold rose to fourteen. Thus, when New Hampshire
   ratified it in December 1812, the amendment again came within two
   states of being ratified. No additional states ratified this amendment
   since. To become part of the Constitution today, ratification by an
   additional twenty-six would be required.

   The Corwin Amendment (proposed 1861) would, if ratified, shield
   "domestic institutions" of the states (which in 1861 included slavery)
   from the constitutional amendment process and from abolition or
   interference by Congress. This proposal was one of several measures
   considered by Congress in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to attract
   the seceding states back into the Union and to entice border slave
   states to stay.^[85] Three states ratified the amendment in the early
   1860s, but none have since. To become part of the Constitution today,
   ratification by an additional thirty-five states would be required. The
   subject of this proposal was subsequently addressed by the 1865
   Thirteenth Amendment which abolished slavery.

   The Child Labor Amendment, (proposed 1924) would, if ratified,
   specifically authorize Congress to limit, regulate and prohibit labor
   of persons less than eighteen years of age. The amendment was proposed
   in response to Supreme Court rulings in Hammer v. Dagenhart (1918) and
   Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co. (1922) that found federal laws
   regulating and taxing goods produced by employees under the ages of 14
   and 16 unconstitutional. When submitted to the states, ratification by
   36 states was required for it to become part of the Constitution, as
   there were forty-eight states. Twenty-eight had ratified the amendment
   by early 1937, but none have done so since. To become part of the
   Constitution today, ratification by an additional ten would be
   required.^[86] A federal statute approved June 25, 1938, regulated the
   employment of those under 16 or 18 years of age. The Supreme Court, by
   unanimous vote in United States v. Darby Lumber Co. (1941), found this
   law constitutional, effectively overturning Hammer v. Dagenhart. As a
   result of this development, the movement pushing for the amendment
   concluded.^[87]

No longer pending

   The Equal Rights Amendment (proposed 1972) would have prohibited
   deprivation of equality of rights (discrimination) by the federal or
   state governments on account of sex. A seven year ratification time
   limit was initially placed on the amendment, but as the deadline
   approached, Congress granted an extension. Thirty-five states had
   ratified the amendment, three short of the number required for it to be
   implemented, prior to the original deadline and none did so during the
   extension period, thus the amendment failed to be adopted.

   The District of Columbia Voting Rights Amendment (proposed 1978) would
   have granted the District of Columbia full representation in the United
   States Congress as if it were a state, repealed the 23rd Amendment,
   granted the District unconditional Electoral College voting rights, and
   allowed its participation in the process by which the Constitution is
   amended. A seven year ratification time limit was placed on the
   amendment. Sixteen states ratified the amendment (twenty-two short of
   the number required for it to be implemented) prior to the deadline,
   thus the amendment failed to be adopted.

Judicial review

   See also: Judicial review in the United States, Judicial review and
   Appellate review

   The way the Constitution is understood is influenced by court
   decisions, especially those of the Supreme Court. These decisions are
   referred to as precedents. Judicial review is the power of the Court to
   examine federal legislation, federal executive, and all state branches
   of government, to decide their constitutionality, and to strike them
   down if found unconstitutional.

   Judicial review includes the power of the Court to explain the meaning
   of the Constitution as it applies to particular cases. Over the years,
   Court decisions on issues ranging from governmental regulation of radio
   and television to the rights of the accused in criminal cases have
   changed the way many constitutional clauses are interpreted, without
   amendment to the actual text of the Constitution.

   Legislation passed to implement the Constitution, or to adapt those
   implementations to changing conditions, broadens and, in subtle ways,
   changes the meanings given to the words of the Constitution. Up to a
   point, the rules and regulations of the many federal executive agencies
   have a similar effect. If an action of Congress or the agencies is
   challenged, however, it is the court system that ultimately decides
   whether these actions are permissible under the Constitution.

   The Supreme Court has indicated that once the Constitution has been
   extended to an area (by Congress or the Courts), its coverage is
   irrevocable. To hold that the political branches may switch the
   Constitution on or off at will would lead to a regime in which they,
   not this Court, say "what the law is.".^[h]

Scope and theory

   Courts established by the Constitution can regulate government under
   the Constitution, the supreme law of the land. First, they have
   jurisdiction over actions by an officer of government and state law.
   Second, federal courts may rule on whether coordinate branches of
   national government conform to the Constitution. Until the twentieth
   century, the Supreme Court of the United States may have been the only
   high tribunal in the world to use a court for constitutional
   interpretation of fundamental law, others generally depending on their
   national legislature.^[88]

                                         Early Court roots in the founding

       *

                               John Jay, 1789-1795
                               New York co-author
                                Federalist Papers
       *

                            John Marshall, 1801-1835
                            Fauquier County delegate
                        Virginia Ratification Convention

   The basic theory of American Judicial review is summarized by
   constitutional legal scholars and historians as follows: the written
   Constitution is fundamental law. It can change only by extraordinary
   legislative process of national proposal, then state ratification. The
   powers of all departments are limited to enumerated grants found in the
   Constitution. Courts are expected (a) to enforce provisions of the
   Constitution as the supreme law of the land, and (b) to refuse to
   enforce anything in conflict with it.^[89]

   In Convention. As to judicial review and the Congress, the first
   proposals by Madison (Va) and Wilson (Pa) called for a supreme court
   veto over national legislation. In this it resembled the system in New
   York, where the Constitution of 1777 called for a "Council of Revision"
   by the Governor and Justices of the state supreme court. The Council
   would review and in a way, veto any passed legislation violating the
   spirit of the Constitution before it went into effect. The
   nationalist’s proposal in Convention was defeated three times, and
   replaced by a presidential veto with Congressional over-ride. Judicial
   review relies on the jurisdictional authority in Article III, and the
   Supremacy Clause.^[90]

   The justification for judicial review is to be explicitly found in the
   open ratifications held in the states and reported in their newspapers.
   John Marshall in Virginia, James Wilson in Pennsylvania and Oliver
   Ellsworth of Connecticut all argued for Supreme Court judicial review
   of acts of state legislature. In Federalist No. 78, Alexander Hamilton
   advocated the doctrine of a written document held as a superior
   enactment of the people. "A limited constitution can be preserved in
   practice no other way" than through courts which can declare void any
   legislation contrary to the Constitution. The preservation of the
   people’s authority over legislatures rests "particularly with
   judges."^[91]^[i]

   The Supreme Court was initially made up of jurists who had been
   intimately connected with the framing of the Constitution and the
   establishment of its government as law. John Jay (NY), a co-author of
   the Federalist Papers, served as Chief Justice for the first six years.
   The second Chief Justice for a term of four years, was Oliver Ellsworth
   (Ct), a delegate in the Constitutional Convention, as was John Rutledge
   (SC), Washington’s recess appointment as Chief Justice who served in
   1795. John Marshall (Va), the fourth Chief Justice, had served in the
   Virginia Ratification Convention in 1788. His service on the Court
   would extend 34 years over some of the most important rulings to help
   establish the nation the Constitution had begun. In the first years of
   the Supreme Court, members of the Constitutional Convention who would
   serve included James Wilson (Pa) for ten years, John Blair, Jr. (Va)
   for five, and John Rutledge (SC) for one year as Justice, then Chief
   Justice in 1795.

Establishment

   When John Marshall followed Oliver Ellsworth as Chief Justice of the
   Supreme Court in 1801, the federal judiciary had been established by
   the Judiciary Act, but there were few cases, and less prestige. "The
   fate of judicial review was in the hands of the Supreme Court itself."
   Review of state legislation and appeals from state supreme courts was
   understood. But the Court’s life, jurisdiction over state legislation
   was limited. The Marshall Court's landmark Barron v. Baltimore held
   that the Bill of Rights restricted only the federal government, and not
   the states.^[91]

   In the landmark Marbury v. Madison case, the Supreme Court asserted its
   authority of judicial review over Acts of Congress. It finds were that
   Marbury and the others had a right to their commissions as judges in
   the District of Columbia. The law afforded Marbury a remedy at court.
   Then Marshall, writing the opinion for the majority, announced his
   discovered conflict between Section 13 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 and
   Article III.^[j]^[93]^[k] The United States government, as created by
   the Constitution is a limited government, and a statute contrary to it
   is not law. In this case, both the Constitution and the statutory law
   applied to the particulars at the same time. "The very essence of
   judicial duty" according to Marshall was to determine which of the two
   conflicting rules should govern. The Constitution enumerates powers of
   the judiciary to extend to cases arising "under the Constitution."
   Courts were required to choose the Constitution over Congressional law.
   Further, justices take a Constitutional oath to uphold it as "Supreme
   law of the land".^[94]

   "This argument has been ratified by time and by practice ..."^[l]^[m]
   "Marshall The Supreme Court did not declare another Act of Congress
   unconstitutional until the disastrous Dred Scott decision in 1857, held
   after the voided Missouri Compromise statute, had already been
   repealed. In the eighty years following the Civil War to World War II,
   the Court voided Congressional statutes in 77 cases, on average almost
   one a year.^[96]

   Something of a crisis arose when, in 1935 and 1936, the Supreme Court
   handed down twelve decisions voiding Acts of Congress relating to the
   New Deal. President Franklin D. Roosevelt then responded with his
   abortive "court packing plan". Other proposals have suggested a Court
   super-majority to overturn Congressional legislation, or a
   Constitutional Amendment to require that the Justices retire at a
   specified age by law. To date, the Supreme Court’s power of judicial
   review has persisted.^[92]

Self-restraint

   The power of judicial review could not have been preserved long in a
   democracy unless it had been "wielded with a reasonable measure of
   judicial restraint, and with some attention, as Mr. Dooley said, to the
   election returns." Indeed, the Supreme Court has developed a system of
   doctrine and practice that self-limits its power of judicial
   review.^[97]

   The Court controls almost all of its business by choosing what cases to
   consider, writs of certiorari. In this way, it can avoid opinions on
   embarrassing or difficult cases. The Supreme Court limits itself by
   defining for itself what is a "justiciable question." First, the Court
   is fairly consistent in refusing to make any "advisory opinions" in
   advance of actual cases.^[n] Second, "friendly suits" between those of
   the same legal interest are not considered. Third, the Court requires a
   "personal interest", not one generally held, and a legally protected
   right must be immediately threatened by government action. Cases are
   not taken up if the litigant has no standing to sue. Simply having the
   money to sue and being injured by government action are not
   enough.^[97]

   These three procedural ways of dismissing cases have led critics to
   charge that the Supreme Court delays decisions by unduly insisting on
   technicalities in their "standards of litigability". Under the Court’s
   practice, there are cases left unconsidered which are in the public
   interest, with genuine controversy, and resulting from good faith
   action. "The Supreme Court is not only a court of law but a court of
   justice."^[98]

Separation of powers

   The Supreme Court balances several pressures to maintain its roles in
   national government. It seeks to be a co-equal branch of government,
   but its decrees must be enforceable. The Court seeks to minimize
   situations where it asserts itself superior to either President or
   Congress, but federal officers must be held accountable. The Supreme
   Court assumes power to declare acts of Congress as unconstitutional but
   it self-limits its passing on constitutional questions.^[99] But the
   Court’s guidance on basic problems of life and governance in a
   democracy is most effective when American political life reinforce its
   rulings.^[100]

   Justice Brandeis summarized four general guidelines that the Supreme
   Court uses to avoid constitutional decisions relating to Congress:^[o]
   The Court will not anticipate a question of constitutional law nor
   decide open questions unless a case decision requires it. If it does, a
   rule of constitutional law is formulated only as the precise facts in
   the case require. The Court will choose statutes or general law for the
   basis of its decision if it can without constitutional grounds. If it
   does, the Court will choose a constitutional construction of an Act of
   Congress, even if its constitutionality is seriously in doubt. ^[99]

   Likewise with the Executive Department, Edwin Corwin observed that the
   Court does sometimes rebuff presidential pretensions, but it more often
   tries to rationalize them. Against Congress, an Act is merely
   "disallowed." In the executive case, exercising judicial review
   produces "some change in the external world" beyond the ordinary
   judicial sphere.^[101] The "political question" doctrine especially
   applies to questions which present a difficult enforcement issue. Chief
   Justice Charles Evans Hughes addressed the Court’s limitation when
   political process allowed future policy change, but a judicial ruling
   would "attribute finality". Political questions lack "satisfactory
   criteria for a judicial determination."^[102]

   John Marshall recognized that the president holds "important political
   powers" which as Executive privilege allows great discretion. This
   doctrine was applied in Court rulings on President Grant’s duty to
   enforce the law during Reconstruction. It extends to the sphere of
   foreign affairs. Justice Robert Jackson explained, Foreign affairs are
   inherently political, "wholly confided by our Constitution to the
   political departments of the government ... [and] not subject to
   judicial intrusion or inquiry."^[103]

   Critics of the Court object in two principle ways to self-restraint in
   judicial review, deferring as it does as a matter of doctrine to Acts
   of Congress and Presidential actions.
    1. Its inaction is said to allow "a flood of legislative
       appropriations" which permanently create an imbalance between the
       states and federal government.
    2. Supreme Court deference to Congress and the executive compromises
       American protection of civil rights, political minority groups and
       aliens.^[104]

   Further information: Separation of powers under the United States
   Constitution

Subsequent Courts

   Main article: History of the Supreme Court of the United States

   Supreme Courts under the leadership of subsequent Chief Justices have
   also used judicial review to interpret the Constitution among
   individuals, states and federal branches. Notable contributions were
   made by the Chase Court, the Taft Court, the Warren Court, and the
   Rehnquist Court.
   Further information: List of United States Supreme Court cases by the
   Chase Court

   Salmon P. Chase was a Lincoln appointee, serving as Chief Justice from
   1864 to 1873. His career encompassed service as a U.S. Senator and
   Governor of Ohio. He coined the slogan, "Free soil, free Labor, free
   men." One of Lincoln’s "team of rivals", he was appointed Secretary of
   Treasury during the Civil War, issuing "greenbacks". To appease radical
   Republicans, Lincoln appointed him to replace Chief Justice Roger B.
   Taney of Dred Scott case fame.

   In one of his first official acts, Chase admitted John Rock, the first
   African-American to practice before the Supreme Court. The "Chase
   Court" is famous for Texas v. White, which asserted a permanent Union
   of indestructible states. Veazie Banks v. Fenno upheld the Civil War
   tax on state banknotes. Hepburn v. Griswold found parts of the Legal
   Tender Acts unconstitutional, though it was reversed under a late
   Supreme Court majority.
   Further information: List of United States Supreme Court cases by the
   Taft Court

                                         Scope of judicial review expanded

       *

                              Salmon P. Chase ^[p]
                              Union, Reconstruction
       *

                              William H. Taft ^[q]
                             commerce, incorporation
       *

                                Earl Warren ^[r]
                            due process, civil rights
       *

                             William Rehnquist ^[s]
                               federalism, privacy

   William Howard Taft was a Harding appointment to Chief Justice from
   1921 to 1930. A Progressive Republican from Ohio, he was a one-term
   President.

   As Chief Justice, he advocated the Judiciary Act of 1925 that brought
   the Federal District Courts under the administrative jurisdiction of
   the Supreme Court. Taft successfully sought the expansion of Court
   jurisdiction over non- states such as District of Columbia and
   Territories of Arizona, New Mexico, Alaska and Hawaii.

   In 1925, the Taft Court issued a ruling overturning a Marshall Court
   ruling on the Bill of Rights. In Gitlow v. New York, the Court
   established the doctrine of "incorporation which applied the Bill of
   Rights to the states. Important cases included the Board of Trade v.
   Olsen that upheld Congressional regulation of commerce. Olmstead v.
   U.S. allowed exclusion of evidence obtained without a warrant based on
   application of the 14th Amendment proscription against unreasonable
   searches. Wisconsin v. Illinois ruled the equitable power of the United
   States can impose positive action on a state to prevent its inaction
   from damaging another state.
   Further information: List of United States Supreme Court cases by the
   Warren Court

   Earl Warren was an Eisenhower nominee, Chief Justice from 1953 to 1969.
   Warren’s Republican career in the law reached from County Prosecutor,
   California state attorney general, and three consecutive terms as
   Governor. His programs stressed progressive efficiency, expanding state
   education, re-integrating returning veterans, infrastructure and
   highway construction.

   In 1954, the Warren Court overturned a landmark Fuller Court ruling on
   the Fourteenth Amendment interpreting racial segregation as permissible
   in government and commerce providing "separate but equal" services.
   Warren built a coalition of Justices after 1962 that developed the idea
   of natural rights as guaranteed in the Constitution. Brown v. Board of
   Education banned segregation in public schools. Baker v. Carr and
   Reynolds v. Sims established Court ordered "one-man-one-vote." Bill of
   Rights Amendments were incorporated into the states. Due process was
   expanded in Gideon v. Wainwright" and Miranda v. Arizona. First
   Amendment rights were addressed in Griswold v. Connecticut concerning
   privacy, and Engel v. Vitale relative to free speech.
   Further information: List of United States Supreme Court cases by the
   Rehnquist Court

   William Rehnquist was a Reagan appointment to Chief Justice, serving
   from 1986 to 2005. While he would concur with overthrowing a state
   supreme court’s decision, as in Bush v. Gore, he built a coalition of
   Justices after 1994 that developed the idea of federalism as provided
   for in the Tenth Amendment. In the hands of the Supreme Court, the
   Constitution and its Amendments were to restrain Congress, as in City
   of Boerne v. Flores.

   Nevertheless, the Rehnquist Court was noted in the contemporary
   "culture wars" for overturning state laws relating to privacy
   prohibiting late-term abortions in Stenberg v. Carhart, prohibiting
   sodomy in Lawrence v. Texas, or ruling so as to protect free speech in
   Texas v. Johnson or affirmative action in Grutter v. Bollinger.

Civic religion

   Main article: American civil religion

   There is a viewpoint that some Americans have come to see the documents
   of the Constitution, along with the Declaration of Independence and the
   Bill of Rights as being a cornerstone of a type of civil religion. This
   is suggested by the prominent display of the Constitution, along with
   the Declaration of Independence and the Bill of Rights, in massive,
   bronze-framed, bulletproof, moisture-controlled glass containers
   vacuum-sealed in a rotunda by day and in multi-ton bomb-proof vaults by
   night at the National Archives Building.^[105]

   The idea of displaying the documents strikes some academic critics
   looking from the point of view of the 1776 or 1789 America as
   "idolatrous, and also curiously at odds with the values of the
   Revolution." ^[105] By 1816 Jefferson wrote that "[s]ome men look at
   constitutions with sanctimonious reverence and deem them like the ark
   of the covenant, too sacred to be touched." But he saw imperfections
   and imagined that potentially, there could be others, believing as he
   did that "institutions must advance also".^[106]

   Some commentators depict the multi-ethnic, multi-sectarian United
   States as held together by a political orthodoxy, in contrast with a
   nation state of people having more "natural" ties.^[107]^[108]

Worldwide influence

                                   *

                                                               José Rizal
                                   *

                                                               Sun Yat-sen

   Main article: United States Constitution and worldwide influence

   The United States Constitution has had influence worldwide on later
   constitutions, as newly independent nations, like the United States,
   emerged from colonial rule. This influence is reflected in the ideals
   of limiting the rulers of a state apart and above sitting law-givers in
   a parliament. The concepts of governance influencing others
   internationally are not only found among similarities in phrasing and
   entire passages from the U.S. Constitution. They are in the principles
   of the rule of law and recognition of individual rights. The American
   experience of fundamental law with amendments and judicial review has
   motivated foreign constitutionalists to reconsider possibilities for
   their own future.^[109] This view informed Abraham Lincoln during the
   American Civil War,^[t] his contemporary and ally Benito Juarez of
   Mexico,^[u] and the second generation of 19th constitutional
   nationalists, José Rizal of the Philippines^[v] and Sun Yat-sen of
   China.^[w]

Criticisms

   Further information: Criticism of the United States Constitution

   The United States Constitution has faced various criticisms since its
   inception in 1787.

   Until the Reconstruction Amendments were adopted between 1865 and 1870,
   the five years immediately following the Civil War, the Constitution
   did not abolish slavery, nor give citizenship and voting rights to
   former slaves.^[115] These amendments did not include a specific
   prohibition on discrimination on the basis of sex; it took another
   amendment—the Nineteenth, ratified in 1920— for the Constitution to
   prohibit any United States citizen from being denied the right to vote
   on the basis of sex.^[116]

See also

     * Timeline of drafting and ratification of the United States
       Constitution
     * Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States by Joseph
       Story (three volumes)
     * Congressional power of enforcement
     * Constitution Day (United States)
     * History of democracy
     * List of national constitutions (world countries)
     * List of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution
     * List of sources of law in the United States
     * National Constitution Center
     * Pocket Constitution
     * State constitution (United States)
     * Second Constitutional Convention of the United States
     * The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and
       Interpretation

   Related documents
     * Mayflower Compact (1620)
     * Fundamental Orders of Connecticut (1639)
     * Massachusetts Body of Liberties (1641)
     * English Bill of Rights (1689)
     * United States Declaration of Independence (1776)
     * Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (1779)

Notes

    1. ^ The discussion in Adler cites Lincoln's explication of the
       preamble that "common welfare" meant those things the people could
       not provide themselves. In 1830, Senator Haynes of South Carolina
       had made a speech for "Liberty first, and Union afterwards". Daniel
       Webster of Massachusetts made a "Reply to Haynes" speech for "Union
       and Liberty, now and forever, one and inseparable".^[30]
    2. ^ The Judiciary Act of 1789 established six Supreme Court justices.
       The number was periodically increased, reaching ten in 1863,
       allowing Lincoln additional appointments. After the Civil War,
       vacancies reduced the number to seven. Congress finally fixed the
       number at nine.
    3. ^ The four concepts which determine "justiciability", the formula
       for a federal court taking and deciding a case, are the doctrines
       of (a) standing, (b) real and substantial interests, (c) adversity,
       and (d) avoidance of political questions.^[36]
    4. ^ Judicial Review is explained in Hamilton's Federalist No. 78. It
       also has roots in Natural Law expressions in the Declaration of
       Independence. The Supreme Court first ruled an act of Congress
       unconstitutional in Marbury v. Madison, the second was Dred
       Scott.^[36]
    5. ^ For instance, 'collateral estoppel' directs that when a litigant
       wins in a state court, they cannot sue in federal court to get a
       more favorable outcome.
    6. ^ Recently numerous habeas corpus reforms have tried to preserve a
       working "relationship of comity" and simultaneously streamline the
       process for state and lower courts to apply Supreme Court
       interpretations.^[36]
    7. ^ Contrary to this source when viewed, the Constitution provides
       that punishments, including forfeiture of income and property, must
       apply to the person convicted. "No attainder of treason shall work
       corruption of blood or forfeiture" on the convicted traitor’s
       children or heirs. This avoids the perpetuation of civil war into
       the generations by Parliamentary majorities as in the War of the
       Roses.^[36]
    8. ^ Downes v. Bidwell, 182 U.S. 244, 261 (1901), commenting on an
       earlier Supreme Court decision, Loughborough v. Blake, 18 U.S. (5
       Wheat.) 317 (1820); Rasmussen v. United States, 197 U.S. 516,
       529-530, 536 (1905)(concurring opinions of Justices Harlan and
       Brown), that once the Constitution has been extended to an area,
       its coverage is irrevocable; Boumediene v. Bush - That where the
       Constitution has been once formally extended by Congress to
       territories, neither Congress nor the territorial legislature can
       enact laws inconsistent therewith. The Constitution grants Congress
       and the President the power to acquire, dispose of, and govern
       territory, not the power to decide when and where its terms apply.
    9. ^ The Supreme Court found 658 cases of invalid state statutes from
       1790-1941 before the advent of Civil Rights cases in the last half
       of the Twentieth Century^[92]
   10. ^ In this, John Marshall leaned on the argument of Hamilton in
       Federalist No. 78.
   11. ^ Although it may be that the true meaning of the Constitution to
       the people of the United States in 1788 can only be divined by a
       study of the state ratification conventions, the Supreme Court has
       used the Federalist Papers as a supplemental guide to the
       Constitution since their co-author, John Jay, was the first Chief
       Justice.
   12. ^ The entire quote reads, "This argument has been ratified by time
       and by practice, and there is little point in quibbling with it. Of
       course, the President also takes an oath to support the
       Constitution."^[95]
   13. ^ The presidential reference is to Andrew Jackson's disagreement
       with Marshall's Court over Worcester v. Georgia, finding Georgia
       could not impose its laws in Cherokee Territory. Jackson replied,
       "John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it!", and
       the Trail of Tears proceeded. Jackson would not politically
       interpose the U.S. Army between Georgia and the Cherokee people as
       Eisenhower would do between Arkansas and the integrating students.
   14. ^ "Advisory opinions" are not the same as "declaratory judgments."
       (a) These address rights and legal relationships in cases of
       "actual controversy", and (b) the holding has the force and effect
       of a final judgment. (c) There is no coercive order, as the parties
       are assumed to follow the judgment, but a "declaratory judgment" is
       the basis of any subsequent ruling in case law.
   15. ^ Louis Brandeis concurring opinion, ‘’Ashwander v. Tennessee
       Valley Authority’’, 1936.
   16. ^ The Chase Court, 1864–1873, in 1865 were the Hon. Salmon P.
       Chase, Chief Justice, U.S.; Hon. Nathan Clifford, Maine; Stephen J.
       Field, Justice Supreme Court, U.S.; Hon. Samuel F. Miller, U.S.
       Supreme Court; Hon. Noah H. Swayne, Justice Supreme Court, U.S.;
       Judge Morrison R. Waite
   17. ^ The Taft Court, 1921–1930, in 1925 were—James Clark McReynolds,
       Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.,William Howard Taft (Chief Justice),
       Willis Van Devanter, Louis Brandeis.—Edward Sanford, George
       Sutherland, Pierce Butler, Harlan Fiske Stone
   18. ^ The Warren Court, 1953-1969, in 1963 were Felix Frankfurter; Hugo
       Black; Earl Warren (Chief Justice); Stanley Reed; WIlliam O.
       Douglas. - Tom Clark; Robert H. Jackson; Harold Burton; Sherman
       Minton
   19. ^ The Rehnquist Court, , 1986–2005.
   20. ^ "Secession was indeed unconstitutional...military resistance to
       secession was not only constitutional but also morally
       justified.^[110] "the primary purpose of the Constitution was ...
       to create ‘a more perfect union’... the Constitution was an
       exercise in nation building.^[111]
   21. ^ Juarez regarded the United States as a model of republican
       democracy and consistently supported Abraham Lincoln.^[112]
   22. ^ The institutions of the two countries which have most influenced
       constitutional development are Spain and the United States." One of
       the reforms, "sine quibus non", to use the words of Rizal and
       Mabini, always insisted upon by the Filipinos, was Philippine
       representation in the Spanish Cortez, the promulgation in the
       Islands of the Spanish Constitution, and the complete assimilation
       equal to that of any in the Spanish provinces on the
       continent.^[113]
   23. ^ In the modern history of China, there were many revolutionaries
       who tried to seek the truth from the West in order to overthrow the
       feudal system of the Ching Dynasty. Dr. Sun Yat-sen for example was
       much influenced by American democracy, especially the U.S.
       Constitution.^[114]

References

Footnotes

    1. ^ Maier 2010, p. 35
    2. ^ United States Senate (1992). "Amendments to the Constitution of
       the United States of America" (PDF). The Constitution of the United
       States of America: Analysis and Interpretation. U.S. Government
       Printing Office. p. 25 n.2. ISBN 9780160632686.
    3. ^ "National Constitution Center". Independence Hall Association.
       Retrieved April 22, 2010.
    4. ^ McLaughlin, Andrew C. (1936). "A constitutional History of the
       United States". New York, London: D. Appleton-Century Company.
       pp. 83–90. Retrieved August 27, 2014.
    5. ^ Morris, Richard B. (December 28, 1976). Presidential Address
       (Speech). American Historical Association. Retrieved June 8, 2014.
    6. ^ Fritz, Christian G. (2008). American Sovereigns: The People and
       America's Constitutional Tradition Before the Civil War. New York:
       Cambridge University Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-0-521-88188-3;  noting
       that "Madison, along with other Americans clearly understood" the
       Articles of Confederation "to be the first federal Constitution."
    7. ^ Jensen, Merrill (1950). The New Nation: A History of the United
       States During the Confederation, 1781–1789. Boston: Northeastern
       University Press. pp. 177–233. ISBN 978-0-930350-14-7.
    8. ^ Wood, Gordon S. (1972). The Creation of the American Republic,
       1776–1787. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 359.
       ISBN 978-0-807-84723-7.
    9. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e ^f Maier 2010, pp. 11–13
   10. ^ Maier 2010, pp. 12-13, 19.
   11. ^ Maier 2010, pp. 15-16.
   12. ^ Bowen 2010, pp. 129-130.
   13. ^ Bowen 2010, p. 31.
   14. ^ Maier 2010, p. 13.
   15. ^ Wood 1998, pp. 356-367, 359.
   16. ^ Maier 2010, pp. 14, 30, 66.
   17. ^ "Resolution of Congress, 21 Feb. 1787". The Founders’
       Constitution. University of Chicago Press;  The Articles Congress
       thus echoed a previous resolution of a conference at Annapolis; see
       "Proceedings of Commissioners to Remedy Defects of the Federal
       Government: 1786".
   18. ^ Maier 2010, p. 21
   19. ^ Finn, John E. (2006). "Civil Liberties and the Bill of Rights
       Part I: Lecture 4: The Court and Constitutional Interpretation".
       The Teaching Company. pp. 52–4. "The most obvious mechanism for
       change is not the freedom to amend the Constitution, not the
       authority to engage in a new Constitutional revolution, but to
       build play into the joints, to build ambiguity and flexibility into
       the very words of the Constitution so that they might mean
       different things to different generations."
   20. ^ "Resolution of Congress of September 28, 1787, Submitting the
       Constitution to the Several States". The Avalon Project at Yale Law
       School. Retrieved August 31, 2014.
   21. ^ "Resolution of the Congress, of September 13, 1788, Fixing Date
       for Election of a President, and the Organization of the Government
       Under the Constitution, in the City of New York" – via Avalon
       Project.
   22. ^ Armstrong, Virginia Irving (1971). I Have Spoken: American
       History Through the Voices of the Indians. Chicago: Sage Books.
       p. 14. ISBN 9780804005296;  see also, "House Concurrent Resolution
       331, October 21, 1988" (PDF). United States Senate. Retrieved
       November 23, 2008.  In October 1988, the U.S. Congress passed
       Concurrent Resolution 331 to recognize the influence of the
       Iroquois Constitution upon the U.S. Constitution and Bill of
       Rights.
   23. ^ Greymont 1972, p. vii
   24. ^ Morgan, Edmund S. (2002). Benjamin Franklin. pp. 80–81.
       ISBN 0-300-10162-7. Retrieved December 29, 2011.
   25. ^ Mee, Charles L., Jr. (1987). The Genius of the People. New York:
       Harper & Row. p. 237.
   26. ^ Greymont 1972, p. 66 These intrigues were mounted by (a) the
       French and British empires, (b) the colonies, then states of New
       York, Pennsylvania and Virginia, and (c) the United States as the
       Continental Congress, the Articles Congress and subsequently.
   27. ^ National Archives and Records Administration. "National Archives
       Article on the Bill of Rights". Retrieved December 16, 2007.
   28. ^ Kilpatrick, James J., ed. (1961). The Constitution of the United
       States and Amendments Thereto. Foreword by Denys P. Myers. Virginia
       Commission on Constitutional Government. p. i (of foreword). ^[full
       citation needed]
   29. ^ Adler 1975, p. 26, 80, 136.
   30. ^ Adler 1975, p. 87.
   31. ^ James Madison was said to believe that the speech alone would
       "crush" nullification forever. (This country of ours, H.E. Marshall
       Part VII, Chapter 73.)
   32. ^ ^a ^b 17. U.S. at 421
   33. ^ "The Presidency: Hamilton". Time. May 28, 1923.
   34. ^ "Martin Van Buren". Herbert Hoover Presidential Library &
       Museum.
   35. ^ ^a ^b Sidak, Gregory (August 1989). "The Recommendation Clause".
       Georgetown Law Journal 77 (6): 2079–2135. Retrieved June 29, 2012.
   36. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e ^f ^g ^h O'Connor 2010.
   37. ^ FindLaw for legal professionals^[dead link], with links to US
       Government Printing office official website, Cornell Law School,
       Emory Law School, and U.S. Supreme Court decisions since 1893,
       (1998, 2000 Supplement). Viewed November 28, 2011.
   38. ^ England, Trent & Spalding, Matthew. "Essays on Article V:
       Amendments". The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved July 31, 2014.
   39. ^ "Proposed Amendments". Constitution Day Observance Events.
       Clayton State University.
   40. ^ Lutz, Donald (1994). "Toward a Theory of Constitutional
       Amendment". The American Political Science Review.
   41. ^ ^a ^b "The Constitutional Amendment Process". National Archives
       and Records Administration. Retrieved July 27, 2014.
   42. ^ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1965). The Oxford History of the American
       People. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 312.
   43. ^ Lloyd, Gordon. "The Six Stages of Ratification of the
       Constitution: Stage I—Now For the Bad News".
       TeachingAmericanHistory.org. The Ashbrook Center at Ashland
       University. Retrieved June 23, 2014.
   44. ^ Neale, Thomas H. "The Proposed Equal Rights Amendment:
       Contemporary Ratification Issues" (PDF). Congressional Research
       Service. Retrieved July 27, 2014.
   45. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment I". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   46. ^ Fletcher v. Haas, 11-10644-DPW (D. Mass. March 30, 2012).
   47. ^ Pierce, John (April 2, 2012). "Permanent Resident Aliens Have
       Second Amendment Rights Too". Monachus Lex. ^[self-published
       source]
   48. ^ Constitutional Law. Casenotes. ^[full citation needed]
   49. ^ Jilson, Cal. American Government: Political Development and
       Institutional Change. ^[full citation needed]
   50. ^ Shaman, Jeffrey. "After Heller: What Now for the Second
       Amendment". Santa Clara Law Review. Retrieved January 30,
       2014. ^[full citation needed]
   51. ^ "US Senate Annotated Constitution". Retrieved January 30, 2014.
   52. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment II". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   53. ^ Epstein, Lee & Walk, Thomas G. (2012). Constitutional Law for a
       Changing America: Rights, Liberties and Justice (8th ed.). CQ
       Press. pp. 395–396. ISBN 978-1-4522-2674-3.
   54. ^ Moncure 1990.
   55. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment III". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   56. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment IV". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   57. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment V". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   58. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment VI". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   59. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment VII". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   60. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment VIII". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   61. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment IX". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   62. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment X". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   63. ^ "Annotation 1: Eleventh Amendment, State Immunity". FindLaw.
       Retrieved May 4, 2013.
   64. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XI". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   65. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XVI". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   66. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XVIII". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   67. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXI". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   68. ^ "The Emancipation Proclamation". National Archives and Records
       Administration. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   69. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XIII". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   70. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XIV". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   71. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XV". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   72. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XIX". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   73. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXIII". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   74. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXIV". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   75. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXVI". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   76. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XII". Annenberg Classroom. Leonore
       Annenberg Institute for Civics of the Annenberg Public Policy
       Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 6,
       2014.
   77. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XVII". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   78. ^
       http://www.law.cornell.edu/anncon/html/amdt20_user.html#amdt20_hd4
   79. ^ See 34 Library of Cong., Journals of the Continental Congress,
       1774–1789, at 523 (Roscoe R. Hill ed., 1937).
   80. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XX". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   81. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXII". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   82. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXV". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   83. ^ Monk, Linda. "Amendment XXVII". www.annenbergclassroom.org.
       Philadelphia, PA: Annenberg Classroom. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
   84. ^ "Capitol Questions". C-SPAN. Retrieved May 29, 2008.
   85. ^ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1965). The Oxford History of the American
       People. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 609.
   86. ^ Kilpatrick, James J., ed. (1961). The Constitution of the United
       States and Amendments Thereto. Virginia Commission on
       Constitutional Government. pp. 68–69.
   87. ^ Griffin, Stephen M. (1998). American Constitutionalism: From
       Theory to Politics. Princeton University Press. p. 89.
       ISBN 9780691002408.
   88. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 134.
   89. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 136.
   90. ^ Pritchett 1959, pp. 137-138.
   91. ^ ^a ^b Pritchett 1959, p. 138.
   92. ^ ^a ^b Pritchett 1959, p. 142.
   93. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 140.
   94. ^ Pritchett 1959, pp. 140-141.
   95. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 141.
   96. ^ Pritchett 1959, pp. 141-142.
   97. ^ ^a ^b Pritchett 1959, p. 145.
   98. ^ Pritchett 1959, pp. 148-149.
   99. ^ ^a ^b Pritchett 1959, p. 149.
   100. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 154.
   101. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 150.
   102. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 151.
   103. ^ Pritchett 1959, pp. 150-151.
   104. ^ Pritchett 1959, p. 153.
   105. ^ ^a ^b Wood, Gordon S., (August 14, 1997). "Dusting off the
       Declaration". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved December 29,
       2011.
   106. ^ Levinson 1987, p. 115.
   107. ^ Levinson 1987, p. 118.
   108. ^ Levinson 1987, p. 119.
   109. ^ Billias 2009, xi–xv.
   110. ^ Farber 2003, p. 3.
   111. ^ Farber 2003, p. 198.
   112. ^ Stacy 2003, p. 436.
   113. ^ Malcolm 1920, p. 109.
   114. ^ QuingYu 1988, p. 193.
   115. ^ Foner, Eric. "The Reconstruction Amendments: Official Documents
       as Social History". The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American
       History. Retrieved December 5, 2012. (subscription required
       (help)).
   116. ^ "The Constitution: The 19th Amendment". National Archives and
       Records Administration. Retrieved December 5, 2012.

Works cited

     * Adler, Mortimer & Gorman, William (1975). The American Testament:
       for the Institute for Philosophical Research and the Aspen
       Institute for Humanistic Studies. New York: Praeger.
       ISBN 978-0-275-34060-5.
     * Billias, George (2009). American Constitutionalism Heard Round the
       World, 1776-1989: A Global Perspective. New York: New York
       University Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-9107-3.
     * Bowen, Catherine (2010) [First published 1966]. Miracle at
       Philadelphia: The Story of the Constitutional Convention, May to
       September 1787. New York: Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-10261-2.
     * Farber, Daniel (2003). Lincoln's Constitution. Chicago: University
       of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-23793-0.
     * Greymont, Barbara (1972). The Iroquois in the American Revolution.
       Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. p. vii.
       ISBN 0-8156-0083-6.
     * Levinson, Sanford (1987). "Pledging Faith in the Civil Religion;
       Or, Would You Sign the Constitution?". William & Mary Law Review 29
       (113). Retrieved December 15, 2011.
     * McDonald, Forrest (1985). Novus Ordo Seclorum: The Intellectual
       Origins of the Constitution. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
       ISBN 978-0-7006-0311-4.
     * Maier, Pauline (2010). Ratification: The People Debate the
       Constitution, 1787–1788. New York: Simon & Schuster.
       ISBN 978-0-684-86854-7.
     * Malcolm, George A. (1920). "Constitutional History of the
       Philippines". American Bar Association Journal 6.
     * Moncure, Thomas M., Jr. (1990). "Who is the Militia: The Virginia
       Ratification Convention and the Right to Bear Arms". Lincoln Law
       Review 19: 1–25. Retrieved November 11, 2011.
     * O'Connor, Tom (2010). "Constitutional Structure". Retrieved
       November 14, 2011.
     * Pritchett, C. Herman (1959). The American Constitution. New York:
       McGraw-Hill.
     * Quing Yu, Li (1988). "Dr. Sun Yat Sen and the U.S. Constitution".
       In Starr, Joseph Barton. The United States Constitution: Its Birth,
       Growth, and Influence in Asia. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University
       Press. ISBN 978-962-209-201-3.
     * Stacy, Lee, ed. (2003). Mexico and the United States. vol. 2.
       London: Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 978-0-7614-7402-9.
     * Wood, Gordon (1998). The Creation of the American Republic,
       1776-1787. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
       ISBN 978-0-8078-4723-7.

Further reading

     * Bailyn, Bernard, ed. (1993). The Debate on the Constitution:
       Federalist and Antifederalist Speeches, Articles, and Letters
       During the Struggle for Ratification. Part One: September 1787 to
       February 1788. The Library of America.
     * Bailyn, Bernard, ed. (1993). The Debate on the Constitution:
       Federalist and Antifederalist Speeches, Articles, and Letters
       During the Struggle for Ratification. Part Two: January to August
       1788. The Library of America. ISBN 0-940450-64-X.
     * Bryce, James, viscount (1891). The American Commonwealth. vol. 1
       (2nd ed.). London: Macmillan and Co. pp. [350]-397, [636]-645,
       669–682, et passim.
     * Casey, Gregory (Spring 1974). "The Supreme Court and Myth: An
       Empirical Investigation". Law & Society Review 8 (3): 385–420.
     * Elliot, Jonathan. The Debates in the Several State Conventions of
       the Adoption of the Federal Constitution. Vol. 1, Constitution,
       Declaration of Independence, Articles of Confederation, Journal of
       Federal Convention, Vol. 2, State Conventions Massachusetts,
       Connecticut., New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Vol.
       3, Virginia, Vol. 4, North. and South. Carolina, Resolutions,
       Tariffs, Banks, Debt, Vol. 5 Debates in Congress, Madison’s Notes,
       Misc. Letters.
     * Ford, Paul Leicester, ed. (1888). Pamphlets on the Constitution of
       the United States, Published During its Discussion by the People,
       1787-1788. Brooklyn, NY;  Pamphlets written between 1787-88 by
       Elbridge Gerry, Noah Webster, John Jay, Melancthon Smith, Pelatiah
       Werster, Tench Coxe, James Wilson, John Dickinson, Alexander Contee
       Hanson, Edmund Randolph, Richard Henry Lee, George Mason, and David
       Ramsay. The essay attributed to Gerry was in fact written by Mercy
       Otis Warren.
     * Fritz, Christian G. (2008). American Sovereigns: The People and
       America's Constitutional Tradition Before the Civil War. Cambridge
       University Press.
     * Garvey, John H., ed. (2004). Modern Constitutional Theory: A Reader
       (5th ed.). ^[full citation needed]
     * Hall, Kermit (1992). The Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of
       the United States. New York: Oxford University Press.
     * Kaminski, John P.; Saladino, Gaspare J.; Leffler, Richard;
       Schoenleber, Charles H. & Hogan, Margaret A. (eds.). Documentary
       History of the Ratification of the Constitution, 1976-. Published
       volumes 1-10, 13-23, forthcoming volumes 11-12, 24-29. Most recent
       volume: The Documentary History of the Ratification of the
       Constitution, Vol. 23, Ratification by the States: New York, No. 5
       Isnb= 978-0-87020-439-5. Madison: The State Historical Society of
       Wisconsin,.
     * Klos, Stanley L. (2004). President Who? Forgotten Founders.
       Pittsburgh, PA: Evisum. p. 261. ISBN 0-9752627-5-0.
     * Kurland, Philip B. & Lerner, Ralph (eds.). The Founders'
       Constitution. University of Chicago Press and the Liberty Fund.
       ISBN 0-86597-279-6;  The work consists of "extracts from the
       leading works of political theory, history, law, and constitutional
       argument on which the Framers and their contemporaries drew and
       which they themselves produced."
     * Levy, Leonard W.; Karst, Kenneth L. & West, John G., eds. (1992).
       Encyclopedia of the American Constitution. New York: Macmillan.
     * Mason, Alpheus Thomas & Stephenson, Donald Grier, eds. (2004).
       American Constitutional Law: Introductory Essays and Selected Cases
       (14th ed.). ^[full citation needed]
     * Robertson, David Brian (2013). The Original Compromise: What the
       Constitutional Framers Were Really Thinking. New York: Oxford
       University Press.
     * Tribe, Laurence H. (1999). American Constitutional Law. ^[full
       citation needed]
     * Yale Law School. "The Avalon Project: Notes on the Debates in the
       Federal Convention". The Avalon Project. Yale Law School. Retrieved
       May 8, 2011.

External links

   Find more about United States Constitution at Wikipedia's sister
   projects
   Search Commons Media from Commons
   Search Wikiquote Quotations from Wikiquote
   Search Wikisource Source texts from Wikisource
   Search Wikibooks Textbooks from Wikibooks

   National Archives
     * National Constitution Center
     * The National Archives Experience: High Resolution Downloads of the
       Charters of Freedom

   Official U.S. government sources
     * Constitution and related resources: Library of Congress
     * Analysis and Interpretation of the Constitution of the United
       States: Annotated constitution, with descriptions of important
       cases (official publication of U.S. Senate)

   Listen to this article (info/dl)
   Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any
   supported player.
   You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your
   browser.

   This audio file was created from a revision of the "United States
   Constitution" article dated 2008-07-17, and does not reflect subsequent
   edits to the article. (Audio help)
   More spoken articles
   Sound-icon.svg

   Non-governmental web sites
     * U.S. Constitution Online
     * Mobile friendly version of the Constitution
     * Audio reading of the Constitution in MP3 format provided by the
       University of Chicago Law School
     * Annotated Constitution by the Congressional Research Service of the
       U.S. Library of Congress (hyperlinked version published by Cornell
       University)
     * "An Account of the Grand Federal Procession. Performed at
       Philadelphia on Friday the 4th of July 1788" by Francis Hopkinson -
       Hopkinson's review of a Philadelphia July 4 parade of 1788;
       celebrating the ratification of the U.S. Constitution.


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Constitution
   Text
   (via Wikisource)
     * Preamble and Articles I-VII
     * Amendments 1-10
     * Amendments 11-27
     * Unsuccessful Proposed Amendments
     * Debates in State Conventions on the Adoption of the Constitution

   Preamble
   & Articles
     * Preamble
     * I
     * II
     * III
     * IV
     * V
     * VI
     * VII

   Amendments
     Ratified
                 * 1
                 * 2
                 * 3
                 * 4
                 * 5
                 * 6
                 * 7
                 * 8
                 * 9
                 * 10
                 * 11
                 * 12
                 * 13
                 * 14
                 * 15
                 * 16
                 * 17
                 * 18
                 * 19
                 * 20
                 * 21
                 * 22
                 * 23
                 * 24
                 * 25
                 * 26
                 * 27

     Pending
                 * Congressional Apportionment
                 * Titles of Nobility
                 * Corwin (State Domestic Institutions)
                 * Child Labor

   Unsuccessful
                 * Equal Rights
                 * District of Columbia Voting Rights

     * List of Constitutional Amendments
     * Bill of Rights (Amendments 1-10)
     * Reconstruction Amendments (Amendments 13-15)

     * Amendment proposal in Congress
     * Conventions to propose amendments
     * State ratifying conventions

   Formation
     * History
     * Articles of Confederation
     * Mount Vernon Conference
     * Annapolis Convention
     * Philadelphia Convention
          + Virginia Plan
          + New Jersey Plan
          + Connecticut Compromise
          + Three-Fifths Compromise
          + Committee of Detail
          + Signers
          + Independence Hall
          + Syng inkstand
     * Federalist Papers
     * Anti-Federalist Papers
     * Massachusetts Compromise
     * Virginia Ratifying Convention
     * Drafting and ratification timeline

   Clauses
     * Appointments
     * Appropriations
     * Assistance of Counsel
     * Bill of credit
     * Case or Controversy
     * Citizenship
     * Commerce
     * Compact
     * Compulsory Process
     * Confrontation
     * Contract
     * Copyright and Patent
     * Double Jeopardy
     * Due Process
     * Equal Protection
     * Establishment
     * Exceptions
     * Excessive Bail
     * Ex post facto
     * Extradition
     * Free Exercise
     * Free Speech
     * Fugitive Slave
     * Full Faith and Credit
     * General Welfare
     * Guarantee
     * Impeachment
     * Ineligibility (Emolument)
     * Militia
     * Natural-born citizen
     * Necessary and Proper
     * No Religious Test
     * Origination
     * Petition
     * Postal
     * Presentment
     * Privileges and Immunities
     * Privileges or Immunities
     * Recommendation
     * Self-Incrimination
     * Speech or Debate
     * Speedy Trial
     * State of the Union
     * Supremacy
     * Suspension
     * Take Care
     * Takings
     * Taxing and Spending
     * Territorial
     * Title of Nobility
     * Treaty
     * Trial by Jury
     * Vesting
     * Vicinage
     * War Powers
     * List of clauses

   Interpretation
     * Concurrent powers
     * Congressional enforcement
     * Constitutional law
     * Criminal procedure
     * Criminal sentencing
     * Dormant Commerce Clause
     * Enumerated powers
     * Executive privilege
     * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
     * Judicial review
     * Nondelegation doctrine
     * Preemption
     * Saxbe fix
     * Separation of church and state
     * Separation of powers
     * Taxation power
     * Unitary executive theory

   US Government Portal • Law Portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Historical documents of the United States


   Constitution

      Preamble
   & Articles
                    * Preamble
                    * I
                    * II
                    * III
                    * IV
                    * V
                    * VI
                    * VII

     Amendments

                    Ratified
                                * 1
                                * 2
                                * 3
                                * 4
                                * 5
                                * 6
                                * 7
                                * 8
                                * 9
                                * 10
                                * 11
                                * 12
                                * 13
                                * 14
                                * 15
                                * 16
                                * 17
                                * 18
                                * 19
                                * 20
                                * 21
                                * 22
                                * 23
                                * 24
                                * 25
                                * 26
                                * 27

                    Pending
                                * Congressional Apportionment
                                * Titles of Nobility
                                * Corwin (State Domestic Institutions)
                                * Child Labor

                  Unsuccessful
                                * Equal Rights
                                * District of Columbia Voting Rights

                    See also
                                * List of Constitutional Amendments
                                * Bill of Rights (Amendments 1-10)
                                * Reconstruction Amendments (Amendments 13-15)
                                * Amendment proposal in Congress
                                * Conventions to propose amendments
                                * State ratifying conventions

     Formation
                    * History
                    * Articles of Confederation
                    * Mount Vernon Conference
                    * Annapolis Convention
                    * Philadelphia Convention
                         + Virginia Plan
                         + New Jersey Plan
                         + Connecticut Compromise
                         + Three-Fifths Compromise
                         + Committee of Detail
                         + Signing
                         + Independence Hall
                         + Syng inkstand
                    * Federalist Papers
                    * Anti-Federalist Papers
                    * Massachusetts Compromise
                    * Virginia Ratifying Convention
                    * Drafting and ratification timeline

      Clauses
                    * Appointments
                    * Appropriations
                    * Assistance of Counsel
                    * Bill of credit
                    * Case or Controversy
                    * Citizenship
                    * Commerce
                    * Compact
                    * Compulsory Process
                    * Confrontation
                    * Contract
                    * Copyright and Patent
                    * Double Jeopardy
                    * Due Process
                    * Equal Protection
                    * Establishment
                    * Exceptions
                    * Excessive Bail
                    * Ex post facto
                    * Extradition
                    * Free Exercise
                    * Free Speech
                    * Fugitive Slave
                    * Full Faith and Credit
                    * General Welfare
                    * Guarantee
                    * Impeachment
                    * Ineligibility (Emolument)
                    * Militia
                    * Natural-born citizen
                    * Necessary and Proper
                    * No Religious Test
                    * Origination
                    * Petition
                    * Postal
                    * Presentment
                    * Privileges and Immunities
                    * Privileges or Immunities
                    * Recommendation
                    * Self-Incrimination
                    * Speech or Debate
                    * Speedy Trial
                    * State of the Union
                    * Supremacy
                    * Suspension
                    * Take Care
                    * Takings
                    * Taxing and Spending
                    * Territorial
                    * Title of Nobility
                    * Treaty
                    * Trial by Jury
                    * Vesting
                    * Vicinage
                    * War Powers
                    * List of clauses

   Interpretation
                    * Concurrent powers
                    * Congressional enforcement
                    * Constitutional law
                    * Criminal procedure
                    * Criminal sentencing
                    * Dormant Commerce Clause
                    * Enumerated powers
                    * Executive privilege
                    * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
                    * Judicial review
                    * Nondelegation doctrine
                    * Preemption
                    * Saxbe fix
                    * Separation of church and state
                    * Separation of powers
                    * Taxation power
                    * Unitary executive theory

    Signatories

                  Convention President
                                        * George Washington

                     New Hampshire
                                        * John Langdon
                                        * Nicholas Gilman

                     Massachusetts
                                        * Nathaniel Gorham
                                        * Rufus King

                      Connecticut
                                        * William Samuel Johnson
                                        * Roger Sherman

                        New York
                                        * Alexander Hamilton

                       New Jersey
                                        * William Livingston
                                        * David Brearley
                                        * William Paterson
                                        * Jonathan Dayton

                      Pennsylvania
                                        * Benjamin Franklin
                                        * Thomas Mifflin
                                        * Robert Morris
                                        * George Clymer
                                        * Thomas Fitzsimons
                                        * Jared Ingersoll
                                        * James Wilson
                                        * Gouverneur Morris

                        Delaware
                                        * George Read
                                        * Gunning Bedford, Jr.
                                        * John Dickinson
                                        * Richard Bassett
                                        * Jacob Broom

                        Maryland
                                        * James McHenry
                                        * Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer
                                        * Daniel Carroll

                        Virginia
                                        * John Blair
                                        * James Madison

                     North Carolina
                                        * William Blount
                                        * Richard Dobbs Spaight
                                        * Hugh Williamson

                     South Carolina
                                        * John Rutledge
                                        * Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
                                        * Charles Pinckney
                                        * Pierce Butler

                        Georgia
                                        * William Few
                                        * Abraham Baldwin

                  Convention Secretary
                                        * William Jackson


   Declaration of Independence

   Primary author
                    * Thomas Jefferson

    Signatories

                  President of Congress
                                         * John Hancock (Massachusetts)

                      New Hampshire
                                         * Josiah Bartlett
                                         * William Whipple
                                         * Matthew Thornton

                      Massachusetts
                                         * Samuel Adams
                                         * John Adams
                                         * Robert Treat Paine
                                         * Elbridge Gerry

                      Rhode Island
                                         * Stephen Hopkins
                                         * William Ellery

                       Connecticut
                                         * Roger Sherman
                                         * Samuel Huntington
                                         * William Williams
                                         * Oliver Wolcott

                        New York
                                         * William Floyd
                                         * Philip Livingston
                                         * Francis Lewis
                                         * Lewis Morris

                       New Jersey
                                         * Richard Stockton
                                         * John Witherspoon
                                         * Francis Hopkinson
                                         * John Hart
                                         * Abraham Clark

                      Pennsylvania
                                         * Robert Morris
                                         * Benjamin Rush
                                         * Benjamin Franklin
                                         * John Morton
                                         * John Clymer
                                         * James Smith
                                         * George Taylor
                                         * James Wilson
                                         * George Ross

                        Delaware
                                         * George Reed
                                         * Caesar Rodney
                                         * Thomas McKean

                        Maryland
                                         * Samuel Chase
                                         * William Paca
                                         * Thomas Stone
                                         * Charles Carroll of Carrollton

                        Virginia
                                         * George Wythe
                                         * Richard Henry Lee
                                         * Thomas Jefferson
                                         * Benjamin Harrison
                                         * Thomas Nelson, Jr.
                                         * Francis Lightfoot Lee
                                         * Carter Braxton

                     North Carolina
                                         * William Hooper
                                         * Joseph Hewes
                                         * John Penn

                     South Carolina
                                         * Edward Rutledge
                                         * Thomas Heyward, Jr.
                                         * Thomas Lynch, Jr.
                                         * Arthur Middleton

                         Georgia
                                         * Button Gwinett
                                         * Lyman Hall
                                         * George Walton

      See also
                    * Committee of Five
                    * Physical history
                    * Second Continental Congress
                    * "All men are created equal"
                    * "Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness"
                    * Independence Hall
                         + Syng inkstand


   Articles of Confederation

   Signatories

               Primary drafter
                                * John Dickinson

                New Hampshire
                                * Josiah Bartlett
                                * John Wentworth, Jr.

                Massachusetts
                                * John Hancock
                                * Samuel Adams
                                * Elbridge Gerry
                                * Francis Dana
                                * James Lovell
                                * Samuel Holten

                Rhode Island
                                * William Ellery
                                * Henry Marchant
                                * John Collins

                 Connecticut
                                * Roger Sherman
                                * Samuel Huntington
                                * Oliver Wolcott
                                * Titus Hosmer
                                * Andrew Adams

                  New York
                                * James Duane
                                * Francis Lewis
                                * William Duer
                                * Gouverneur Morris

                 New Jersey
                                * John Witherspoon
                                * Nathaniel Scudder

                Pennsylvania
                                * Robert Morris
                                * Daniel Roberdeau
                                * Jonathan Bayard Smith
                                * William Clingan
                                * Joseph Reed

                  Delaware
                                * Thomas McKean
                                * John Dickinson
                                * Nicholas Van Dyke

                  Maryland
                                * John Hanson
                                * Daniel Carroll

                  Virginia
                                * Richard Henry Lee
                                * John Banister
                                * Thomas Adams
                                * John Harvie
                                * Francis Lightfoot Lee

               North Carolina
                                * John Penn
                                * Cornelius Harnett
                                * John Williams

               South Carolina
                                * Henry Laurens
                                * William Henry Drayton
                                * John Mathews
                                * Richard Hutson
                                * Thomas Heyward, Jr.

                   Georgia
                                * John Walton
                                * Edward Telfair
                                * Edward Langworthy

    See also
                 * Continental Congress


   Continental Association

   Signatories

               President of Congress
                                      * Peyton Randolph

                   New Hampshire
                                      * John Sullivan
                                      * Nathaniel Folsom

                 Massachusetts Bay
                                      * Thomas Cushing
                                      * Samuel Adams
                                      * John Adams
                                      * Robert Treat Paine

                   Rhode Island
                                      * Stephen Hopkins
                                      * Samuel Ward

                    Connecticut
                                      * Eliphalet Dyer
                                      * Roger Sherman
                                      * Silas Deane

                     New York
                                      * Isaac Low
                                      * John Alsop
                                      * John Jay
                                      * James Duane
                                      * Philip Livingston
                                      * William Floyd
                                      * Henry Wisner
                                      * Simon Boerum

                    New Jersey
                                      * James Kinsey
                                      * William Livingston
                                      * Stephen Crane
                                      * Richard Smith
                                      * John De Hart

                   Pennsylvania
                                      * Joseph Galloway
                                      * John Dickinson
                                      * Charles Humphreys
                                      * Thomas Mifflin
                                      * Edward Biddle
                                      * John Morton
                                      * George Ross


     * v
     * t
     * e

   James Madison
     * March 16, 1751 – June 28, 1836

     * 4th President of the United States (1809–1817)
     * 5th U.S. Secretary of State (1801–1809)
     * United States House of Representatives (1789–1797)
     * Congress of the Confederation (1781–1783)
     * Virginia House of Delegates (1776–1779, 1784–1786)

   "Father of the
   Constitution"
     * 1786 Annapolis Convention
     * Constitutional Convention
     * Virginia Plan
     * Constitution of the United States
     * United States Bill of Rights
          + 27th amendment
     * The Federalist Papers
          + written by Madison
          + No. 10
          + No. 51
     * Virginia Ratifying Convention
     * Constitution drafting and ratification timeline
     * Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787
     * Founding Fathers

   Presidency
     * First inauguration
     * Second inauguration
     * Tecumseh's War
          + Battle of Tippecanoe
     * War of 1812
          + origins
          + Burning of Washington
          + The Octagon House
          + Treaty of Ghent
          + results
     * Second Barbary War
     * Era of Good Feelings
     * Second Bank of the United States
     * State of the Union Address (1810
     * 1814
     * 1815
     * 1816)
     * Cabinet
     * Federal judiciary appointments
     * Seven Buildings residence

   Other noted
   accomplisments
     * Democratic-Republican Party
          + First Party System
          + republicanism
     * Supervised the Louisiana Purchase
     * Library of Congress
     * Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions
     * Report of 1800
     * Residence Act
          + Compromise of 1790

   Other writings
     * The Papers of James Madison

   Life
     * Early life and career
     * Belle Grove Plantation, birthplace
     * Montpelier

   Elections
     * U.S. House of Representatives election, 1789
     * 1790
     * 1792
     * 1794
     * U.S. presidential election, 1808
     * 1812

   Legacy and
   popular culture
     * James Madison Memorial Building
     * James Madison University
     * Madison Square
     * Madison River
     * Madison, Wisconsin
     * Madison Street
     * U.S. postage stamps
     * James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation
     * James Madison Freedom of Information Award
     * James Madison Award
     * James Madison Institute
     * A More Perfect Union (1989 film)
     * Liberty's Kids (2002 miniseries)

   Family
     * Dolley Madison (wife)
     * John Payne Todd (stepson)
     * James Madison, Sr. (father)
     * Nelly Conway Madison (mother)
     * Ambrose Madison (grandfather)
     * James Madison (cousin)
     * George Madison (second-cousin)
     * Thomas Madison (second-cousin)
     * John Madison (great-grandfather)
     * Lucy Washington (sister-in-law)

   Related
     * American Enlightenment
     * Marbury v. Madison
     * National Gazette
     * Paul Jennings
     * Madisonian Model
     * American Philosophical Society
     * The American Museum magazine
     * Virginia dynasty

   US Presidency Portal • American Revolutionary War Portal
     * ← Thomas Jefferson
     * James Monroe →

     * Commons page Commons
     * Wikipedia book Book:Federalist Papers
     * Wikibooks page Wikibooks
     * Wikiquote page Wikiquote
     * Wikisource page Wikisource


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Constitutions of states and dependencies in the Americas
     * North America
     * South America

   Sovereign states
     * Antigua and Barbuda
     * Argentina
     * Bahamas
     * Barbados
     * Belize
     * Bolivia
     * Brazil
     * Canada
     * Chile
     * Colombia
     * Costa Rica
     * Cuba
     * Dominica
     * Dominican Republic
     * Ecuador
     * El Salvador
     * Grenada
     * Guatemala
     * Guyana
     * Haiti
     * Honduras
     * Jamaica
     * Mexico
     * Nicaragua
     * Panama
     * Paraguay
     * Peru
     * Saint Kitts and Nevis
     * Saint Lucia
     * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
     * Suriname
     * Trinidad and Tobago
     * United States
     * Uruguay
     * Venezuela

   Americas (orthographic projection).svg
   Dependencies and
   other territories
     * Anguilla
     * Aruba
     * Bermuda
     * Bonaire
     * British Virgin Islands
     * Cayman Islands
     * Curaçao
     * Falkland Islands
     * French Guiana
     * Greenland
     * Guadeloupe
     * Martinique
     * Montserrat
     * Navassa Island
     * Puerto Rico
     * Saint Barthélemy
     * Saint Martin
     * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
     * Saba
     * Sint Eustatius
     * Sint Maarten
     * South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
     * Turks and Caicos Islands
     * US Virgin Islands

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Constitution&o
   ldid=625954811"
   Categories:
     * 1787 in the United States
     * 1789 establishments in the United States
     * 1789 in law
     * 1789 in the United States
     * James Madison
     * Official documents of the United States
     * Political charters
     * United States Constitution
     * American political philosophy literature

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles needing more detailed references
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from July 2013
     * Accuracy disputes from August 2014
     * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
     * Use mdy dates from August 2014
     * Wikipedia semi-protected pages
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014
     * Articles needing additional references from June 2012
     * All articles needing additional references
     * Spoken articles
     * Articles with hAudio microformats

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * View source
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Башҡортса
     * Беларуская
     * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
     * Български
     * Bosanski
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * Galego
     * 贛語
     * 한국어
     * Հայերեն
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Íslenska
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * ಕನ್ನಡ
     * ქართული
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * मराठी
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Саха тыла
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Slovenščina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * Tagalog
     * தமிழ்
     * ไทย
     * Тоҷикӣ
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * Tiếng Việt
     * Yorùbá
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 17 September 2014 at 14:44.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
