   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Culture of the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Part of a series on the
       Culture of the United States
   Flag of the United States.svg
                 History
                  People
                Languages
   Mythology and folklore
     * Mythology
     * Folklore

                 Cuisine
                Festivals
                 Religion
   Art
     * Architecture
     * Sculpture
     * Fashion

   Literature
     * Comic books
     * Poetry

   Music and performing arts
     * Music

   Media
     * Radio
     * Television
     * Cinema

                  Sport
   Monuments
     * World Heritage Sites

   Symbols
     * Flag
     * Coat of arms

     * Portal icon United States portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

   The culture of the United States is primarily Western, but is
   influenced by Native American, African, Asian, Polynesian, and Latin
   American cultures. A strand of what may be described as American
   culture started its formation over 10,000 years ago with the migration
   of Paleo-Indians from Asia, as well as from Oceania and Europe, into
   the region that is today the continental United States. The United
   States of America has its own unique social and cultural
   characteristics such as dialect, music, arts, social habits, cuisine,
   and folklore. The United States of America is an ethnically and
   racially diverse country as a result of large-scale migration from many
   ethnically and racially different countries throughout its history as
   well as differing birth and death rates among natives, settlers, and
   immigrants.^[1]

   Its chief early European influences came from English, Scottish, Welsh
   and Irish settlers of colonial America during British rule. British
   culture, due to colonial ties with Britain that spread the English
   language, legal system and other cultural inheritances, had a formative
   influence. Other important influences came from other parts of Europe,
   especially Germany,^[2] France, and Italy.^[citation needed]

   Original elements also play a strong role, such as Jeffersonian
   democracy.^[3] Thomas Jefferson's Notes on the State of Virginia was
   perhaps the first influential domestic cultural critique by an American
   and a reactionary piece to the prevailing European consensus that
   America's domestic originality was degenerate.^[3] Prevalent ideas and
   ideals that evolved domestically, such as national holidays, uniquely
   American sports, military tradition, and innovations in the arts and
   entertainment give a strong sense of national pride among the
   population as a whole.^[citation needed]

   American culture includes both conservative and liberal elements,
   scientific and religious competitiveness, political structures, risk
   taking and free expression, materialist and moral elements. Despite
   certain consistent ideological principles (e.g. individualism,
   egalitarianism, and faith in freedom and democracy), American culture
   has a variety of expressions due to its geographical scale and
   demographic diversity. The flexibility of U.S. culture and its highly
   symbolic nature lead some researchers to categorize American culture as
   a mythic identity;^[4] others see it as American exceptionalism
   .^[citation needed]

   It also includes elements that evolved from Indigenous Americans, and
   other ethnic cultures—most prominently the culture of African
   Americans, cultures from Latin America, and Asian American cultures.
   Many American cultural elements, especially from popular culture, have
   spread across the globe through modern mass media.

   The United States has traditionally been thought of as a melting pot,
   however beginning in the 1960s and continuing on in the present day,
   the country trends towards cultural diversity, pluralism and the image
   of a salad bowl instead.^[5]^[6]^[7] Due to the extent of American
   culture, there are many integrated but unique social subcultures within
   the United States. The cultural affiliations an individual in the
   United States may have commonly depend on social class, political
   orientation and a multitude of demographic characteristics such as
   religious background, occupation and ethnic group membership.^[1]

Contents

     * 1 Regional variations
          + 1.1 Fischer's theory
          + 1.2 Woodard's Theory
     * 2 Language
          + 2.1 Native language statistics for the United States
     * 3 Literature
     * 4 Fine arts
          + 4.1 Architecture
          + 4.2 Theater
          + 4.3 Dance
          + 4.4 Music
          + 4.5 Cinema
          + 4.6 Broadcasting
     * 5 Science and technology
     * 6 Education
     * 7 Religion
          + 7.1 Statistics
     * 8 Folklore
     * 9 National holidays
     * 10 Fashion and dress
     * 11 Names
     * 12 Sports
          + 12.1 Sports and community culture
     * 13 Cuisine
     * 14 Family structure
          + 14.1 Youth Dependence
     * 15 Housing
          + 15.1 Automobiles and commuting
     * 16 Social class and work
     * 17 Race and ancestry
     * 18 Death and funerals
     * 19 Sociological issues
          + 19.1 Marriage and divorce
          + 19.2 Race relations
          + 19.3 Drugs and alcohol
     * 20 Group affiliations
     * 21 Volunteerism
     * 22 Military culture
     * 23 Gun culture
     * 24 Other aspects
     * 25 Influence
     * 26 See also
     * 27 References
     * 28 Further reading
     * 29 External links

Regional variations[edit]

   Semi-distinct cultural regions of the United States include New
   England, the Mid-Atlantic states, the Southern United States, the
   Midwestern United States and the Western United States—an area that can
   be further subdivided, on the basis of the local culture into the
   Pacific States and the Mountain States.

   The western coast of the continental United States consisting of
   California, Oregon, and the state of Washington is also sometimes
   referred to as the Left Coast, indicating its left-leaning political
   orientation and tendency towards social liberalism.

   Southern United States are informally called "the Bible Belt" due to
   socially conservative evangelical Protestantism, which is a significant
   part of the region's culture and Christian church attendance across the
   denominations is generally higher there than the nation's average. This
   region is usually contrasted with the mainline Protestantism and
   Catholicism of the northeastern United States, the religiously diverse
   Midwest and Great Lakes, the Mormon Corridor in Utah and southern
   Idaho, and the relatively secular western United States. The percentage
   of non-religious people is the highest in the northeastern state of
   Vermont at 34%, compared to the Bible Belt state of Alabama, where it
   is 6%.^[8]

   Strong cultural differences have a long history in the U.S. with the
   southern slave society in the antebellum period serving as a prime
   example. Not only social, but also economic tensions between the
   Northern and Southern states were so severe that they eventually caused
   the South to declare itself an independent nation, the Confederate
   States of America; thus initiating the American Civil War.^[9]

Fischer's theory[edit]

   David Hackett Fischer theorizes that the United States is made up today
   of four distinct regional cultures.^[10] The book's focus is on the
   folkways of four groups of settlers from the British Isles that
   emigrated from distinct regions of Britain and Ireland to the British
   American colonies during the 17th and 18th centuries. Fischer's thesis
   is that the culture and folkways of each of these groups persisted,
   albeit with some modification over time, providing the basis for the
   four modern regional cultures of the United States.

   According to Fischer, the foundation of American culture was formed
   from four mass migrations from four different regions of the British
   Isles by four distinct socio-religious groups. New England's earliest
   settlement period occurred between 1629 and 1640 when Puritans, mostly
   from East Anglia in England, settled there, forming the New England
   regional culture. The next mass migration was of southern English
   cavaliers and their Irish and Scottish domestic servants to the
   Chesapeake Bay region between 1640 and 1675. This facilitated the
   development of the Southern American culture.

   Then (between 1675 and 1725), thousands of Irish, English and German
   Quakers, led by William Penn, settled in the Delaware Valley. This
   settlement resulted in the formation of what is today considered the
   "General American" culture, although, according to Fischer, it is
   really just a regional American culture, even if it does today
   encompass most of the U.S. from the mid-Atlantic states to the Pacific
   Coast. Finally, Scotch-Irish, English and Scottish settlers from the
   borderlands of Britain and Ireland migrated to Appalachia between 1717
   and 1775. They formed the regional culture of the Upland South, which
   has since spread west to such areas as West Texas and parts of the U.S.
   Southwest.

   Fischer suggests that the U.S. today is not a country with one General
   American culture and three or more regional sub-cultures. He asserts
   that the country is composed of just regional cultures, and that
   understanding that helps one to understand many things about modern
   American life. Fischer also makes the point that the development of
   these regional cultures derived not only from where exactly the
   settlers first came, but when they came. Fischer asserts that during
   different periods of time, a population of people will have very
   distinct beliefs, fears, hopes and prejudices, and that various groups
   of settlers brought these feelings to the New World where they more or
   less froze in time in America, even if they eventually changed in their
   place of origin.

Woodard's Theory[edit]

   Continuing the work of Fischer, Colin Woodard, in his book American
   Nations,^[11] claims an existence of eleven rival regional cultures in
   North America, based on the cultural characteristics of the original
   settlers of these regions. These regions are: Yankeedom, New
   Netherland, The Midlands, Tidewater, Greater Appalachia, The Deep
   South, New France, El Norte, The Left Coast, The Far West and First
   Nation (a region in parts of northern Canada and Alaska, and
   Greenland).
   According to Woodard, these regions cross and disregard formal state or
   even country borders. For example, he compares the Mexican border with
   the Berlin wall, saying that "El Norte in some ways resembles Germany
   during the Cold War: two peoples with a common culture separated by a
   large wall."

Language[edit]

   Main article: Languages of the United States

   Although the United States has no official language at the federal
   level, 28 states have passed legislation making English the official
   language and it is considered to be the de facto national language.
   According to the 2000 U.S. Census, more than 97% of Americans can speak
   English well, and for 81% it is the only language spoken at home. More
   than 300 languages besides English have native speakers in the United
   States—some of which are spoken by the indigenous peoples (about 150
   living languages) and others imported by immigrants.

   Spanish has official status in the commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the
   state of New Mexico; Spanish is the primary spoken language in Puerto
   Rico and various smaller linguistic enclaves.^[12] According to the
   2000 census, there are nearly 30 million native speakers of Spanish in
   the United States. Bilingual speakers may use both English and Spanish
   reasonably well but code-switch according to their dialog partner or
   context. Some refer to this phenomenon as Spanglish.

   Indigenous languages of the United States include the Native American
   languages, which are spoken on the country’s numerous Indian
   reservations and Native American cultural events such as pow wows;
   Hawaiian, which has official status in the state of Hawaii; Chamorro,
   which has official status in the commonwealths of Guam and the Northern
   Mariana Islands; Carolinian, which has official status in the
   commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; and Samoan, which has
   official status in the commonwealth of American Samoa. American Sign
   Language, used mainly by the deaf, is also native to the country.

   The national dialect is known as American English, which itself
   consists of numerous regional dialects but has some shared unifying
   features that distinguish it from other national varieties of English.
   There are four large dialect regions in the United States—the North,
   the Midland, the South, and the West—and several smaller dialect
   regions such as those of New York City and Boston. A standard dialect
   called "General American" (analogous in some respects to the received
   pronunciation elsewhere in the English-speaking world), lacking the
   distinctive noticeable features of any particular region, is believed
   by some to exist as well; it is sometimes regionally associated with
   the vaguely-defined "Midwest".

Native language statistics for the United States[edit]

   The following information is an estimation as actual statistics
   constantly vary.

   According to the CIA,^[13] the following is the percentage of total
   population's native languages in the United States:
     * English (82.1%)
     * Spanish (10.7%)
     * Other Indo-European languages (3.8%)
     * Other Asian or Pacific Islander languages (2.7%)
     * Other languages (0.7%)

Literature[edit]

   Main article: American literature
   Mark Twain is regarded as among the greatest writers in American
   history.

   The right to freedom of expression in the American constitution can be
   traced to German immigrant John Peter Zenger and his legal fight to
   make truthful publications in the Colonies a protected legal
   right,^[relevant? – discuss] ultimately paving the way for the
   protected rights of American authors.^[14]^[15]

   In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, American art and
   literature took most of its cues from Europe. During its early history,
   America was a series of British colonies on the eastern coast of the
   present-day United States. Therefore, its literary tradition begins as
   linked to the broader tradition of English literature. However, unique
   American characteristics and the breadth of its production usually now
   cause it to be considered a separate path and tradition.^[citation
   needed]

   America's first internationally popular writers were James Fenimore
   Cooper and Washington Irving in the early nineteenth century. They
   painted an American literary landscape full of humor and adventure.
   These were followed by Nathaniel Hawthorne, Edgar Allan Poe, Herman
   Melville, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Henry
   David Thoreau who established a distinctive American literary voice in
   the middle of the nineteenth century.

   Mark Twain, Henry James, and poet Walt Whitman were major figures in
   the century's second half; Emily Dickinson, virtually unknown during
   her lifetime, would be recognized as America's other essential poet.
   Eleven U.S. citizens have won the Nobel Prize in Literature, including
   John Steinbeck, William Faulkner, Eugene O'Neill, Pearl S. Buck, T. S.
   Eliot and Sinclair Lewis. Ernest Hemingway, the 1954 Nobel laureate, is
   often named as one of the most influential writers of the twentieth
   century.^[16]

   A work seen as capturing fundamental aspects of the national experience
   and character—such as Herman Melville's Moby-Dick (1851), Twain's The
   Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1885), and F. Scott Fitzgerald's The
   Great Gatsby (1925)—may be dubbed the "Great American Novel". Popular
   literary genres such as the Western and hardboiled crime fiction were
   developed in the United States.

Fine arts[edit]

   In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, American artists
   primarily painted landscapes and portraits in a realistic style. A
   parallel development taking shape in rural America was the American
   craft movement, which began as a reaction to the Industrial Revolution.
   Developments in modern art in Europe came to America from exhibitions
   in New York City such as the Armory Show in 1913. After World War II,
   New York emerged as a center of the art world. Painting in the United
   States today covers a vast range of styles. American painting includes
   works by Jackson Pollock, John Singer Sargent, and Norman Rockwell,
   among many others.

Architecture[edit]

   Main article: Architecture of the United States

   Architecture in the United States is regionally diverse and has been
   shaped by many external forces, not only English. U.S. architecture can
   therefore be said to be eclectic, something unsurprising in such a
   multicultural society.^[17] In the absence of a single large-scale
   architectural influence from indigenous peoples such as those in Mexico
   or Peru, generations of designers have incorporated influences from
   around the world. Currently, the overriding theme of American
   Architecture is modernity, as manifest in the skyscrapers of the 20th
   century.

   Early Neoclassicism accompanied the Founding Father's idealization of
   European Enlightenment, making it the predominant architectural style
   for public buildings and large manors. However, in recent years,
   suburbanization and mass migration to the Sun Belt has allowed
   architecture to reflect a Mediterranean style as well.^[citation
   needed]##

Theater[edit]

   [icon] This section requires expansion. (October 2012)
   Main article: Theater of the United States

   Theater of the United States is based in the Western tradition and did
   not take on a unique dramatic identity until the emergence of Eugene
   O'Neill in the early twentieth century, now considered by many to be
   the father of American drama. O'Neill is a four-time winner of the
   Pulitzer Prize for drama and the only American playwright to win the
   Nobel Prize for literature. After O'Neill, American drama came of age
   and flourished with the likes of Arthur Miller, Tennessee Williams,
   Lillian Hellman, William Inge, and Clifford Odets during the first half
   of the twentieth century. After this fertile period, American theater
   broke new ground, artistically, with the absurdist forms of Edward
   Albee in the 1960s.

   Social commentary has also been a preoccupation of American theater,
   often addressing issues not discussed in the mainstream. Writers such
   as Lorraine Hansbury, August Wilson, David Mamet and Tony Kushner have
   all won Pulitzer Prizes for their polemical plays on American society.
   The United States is also the home and largest exporter of modern
   musical theater, producing such musical talents as Rodgers and
   Hammerstein, Lerner and Loewe, Cole Porter, Irving Berlin, Leonard
   Bernstein, George and Ira Gershwin, Kander and Ebb, and Stephen
   Sondheim. Broadway is one of the largest theater communities in the
   world and is the epicenter of American commercial theater.

Dance[edit]

   Main article: Dance in the United States

   The United States is represented by various genres of dance, from
   ballet to hip-hop.

Music[edit]

   Main articles: Music of the United States and Music history of the
   United States
   Further information: Category:American singers
   Further information: List of American composers
   Frank Sinatra is awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President
   Ronald Reagan.

   American music styles and influences (such as country, jazz, rock and
   roll, rock, hip-hop, rap) and music based on them can be heard all over
   the world. Music in the U.S. is diverse. It includes African-American
   influence in the 20th century. The first half of this century is famous
   for jazz, introduced by African-Americans in the south. In the 1960s,
   1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, rock was prevalent.

Cinema[edit]

   Main articles: Television in the United States and Cinema of the United
   States

   The cinema of the United States, often generally referred to as
   Hollywood, has had a profound effect on cinema across the world since
   the early twentieth century. Its history can be separated into four
   main periods: the silent film era, classical Hollywood cinema, New
   Hollywood, and the contemporary period. While the Lumiere Brothers are
   generally credited with the birth of modern cinema, it is American
   cinema that has emerged as the most dominant force in the industry.

   American independent cinema was revitalized in the late 1980s and early
   1990s when another new generation of moviemakers, including Spike Lee,
   Steven Soderbergh, Kevin Smith, and Quentin Tarantino made movies like,
   respectively: Do the Right Thing; Sex, Lies, and Videotape; Clerks; and
   Reservoir Dogs. In terms of directing, screenwriting, editing, and
   other elements, these movies were innovative and often irreverent,
   playing with and contradicting the conventions of Hollywood movies.
   Furthermore, their considerable financial successes and crossover into
   popular culture reestablished the commercial viability of independent
   film. Since then, the independent film industry has become more clearly
   defined and more influential in American cinema. Many of the major
   studios have capitalized on this by developing subsidiaries to produce
   similar films; for example Fox Searchlight Pictures.

   To a lesser degree in the early 21st century, film types that were
   previously considered to have only a minor presence in the mainstream
   movie market began to arise as more potent American box office draws.
   These include foreign-language films such as Crouching Tiger, Hidden
   Dragon and Hero and documentary films such as Super Size Me, March of
   the Penguins, and Michael Moore's Bowling for Columbine and Fahrenheit
   9/11.

Broadcasting[edit]

   Wiki letter w.svg This section is empty. You can help by adding to it.
                     (October 2012)
   Main articles: Television in the United States and Radio in the United
   States
   American family watching TV, 1958

Science and technology[edit]

   Question book-new.svg
   This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help
   improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (July 2012)
   Further information: Science and technology in the United States
   The Washington Post on Monday, July 21, 1969 stating "'The Eagle Has
   Landed'—Two Men Walk on the Moon".

   There is a regard for scientific advancement and technological
   innovation in American culture, resulting in the flow of many modern
   innovations. The great American inventors include Robert Fulton (the
   steamboat); Samuel Morse (the telegraph); Eli Whitney (the cotton gin,
   interchangeable parts); Cyrus McCormick (the reaper); and Thomas Edison
   (with more than a thousand inventions credited to his name). Most of
   the new technological innovations over the 20th and 21st centuries were
   either first invented in the United States and/or first widely adopted
   by Americans. Examples include the lightbulb, the airplane, the
   transistor, the atomic bomb, nuclear power, the personal computer, the
   iPod, video games and online shopping, as well as the development of
   the Internet.

   This propensity for application of scientific ideas continued
   throughout the 20th century with innovations that held strong
   international benefits. The twentieth century saw the arrival of the
   Space Age, the Information Age, and a renaissance in the health
   sciences. This culminated in cultural milestones such as the Apollo
   moon landings, the creation of the Personal Computer, and the
   sequencing effort called the Human Genome Project.

   Throughout its history, American culture has made significant gains
   through the open immigration of accomplished scientists. Accomplished
   scientists include: Scottish-American scientist Alexander Graham Bell,
   who developed and patented the telephone and other devices; German
   scientist Charles Steinmetz, who developed new alternating-current
   electrical systems in 1889; Russian scientist Vladimir Zworykin, who
   invented the motion camera in 1919; Serb scientist Nikola Tesla who
   patented a brushless electrical induction motor based on rotating
   magnetic fields in 1888. With the rise of the Nazi party in Germany, a
   large number of Jewish scientists fled Germany and immigrated to the
   country, one of them being a Jewish theoretical physicist Albert
   Einstein in the year 1933.

   In the years during and following WWII, several innovative scientists
   immigrated to the U.S. from Europe, such as Enrico Fermi, who came from
   Italy in 1938 and led the work that produced the world's first
   self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction. Post-war Europe saw many of its
   scientists, such as rocket scientist Wernher von Braun, recruited by
   the United States as part of Operation Paperclip.^[relevant? – discuss]

Education[edit]

   Main articles: Education in the United States and Educational
   attainment in the United States
   Higher education in the US by race as of 2003

   Education in the United States is and has historically been provided
   mainly by government, with control and funding coming from three
   levels: federal, state, and local. School attendance is mandatory and
   nearly universal at the elementary and high school levels (often known
   outside the United States as the primary and secondary levels).

   Students have the options of having their education held in public
   schools, private schools, or home school. In most public and private
   schools, education is divided into three levels: elementary school,
   junior high school (also often called middle school), and high school.
   In almost all schools at these levels, children are divided by age
   groups into grades. Post-secondary education, better known as "college"
   in the United States, is generally governed separately from the
   elementary and high school system.

   In the year 2000, there were 76.6 million students enrolled in schools
   from kindergarten through graduate schools. Of these, 72 percent aged
   12 to 17 were judged academically "on track" for their age (enrolled in
   school at or above grade level). Of those enrolled in compulsory
   education, 5.2 million (10.4 percent) were attending private schools.
   Among the country's adult population, over 85 percent have completed
   high school and 27 percent have received a bachelor's degree or
   higher.^[citation needed]

Religion[edit]

   Main article: Religion in the United States
   See also: Protestant work ethic
   Completed in 1716, San Antonio Missions National Historical Park is one
   of numerous surviving colonial Spanish missions in the United States.
   These were primarily used to convert the Native Americans to Roman
   Catholicism.

   Among developed countries, the U.S. is one of the most religious in
   terms of its demographics. According to a 2002 study by the Pew Global
   Attitudes Project, the U.S. was the only developed nation in the survey
   where a majority of citizens reported that religion played a "very
   important" role in their lives, an opinion similar to that found in
   Latin America.^[18] Today, governments at the national, state, and
   local levels are a secular institution, with what is often called the
   "separation of church and state".

   Although participation in organized religion has been diminishing, the
   public life and popular culture of the United States incorporates many
   Christian ideals specifically about redemption, salvation, conscience,
   and morality. Examples are popular culture obsessions with confession
   and forgiveness, which extends from reality television to twelve-step
   meetings. Americans expect public figures to confess and have public
   penitence for any sins, or moral wrongdoings they may have caused.
   According to Salon, examples of inadequate public penitence may include
   the scandals and fallout regarding Tiger Woods, Alex Rodriguez, Mel
   Gibson, Larry Craig, and Lance Armstrong.^[19]
   Brick Presbyterian Church in suburban East Orange, New Jersey

   Several of the original Thirteen Colonies were established by English
   and Irish settlers who wished to practice their own religion without
   discrimination or persecution: Pennsylvania was established by Quakers,
   Maryland by Roman Catholics, and the Massachusetts Bay Colony by
   Puritans. Separatist Congregationalists (Pilgrim Fathers) founded
   Plymouth Colony in 1620. They were convinced that the democratic form
   of government was the will of God.^[20] They and the other Protestant
   groups applied the representative democratic organisation of their
   congregations also to the administration of their communities in wordly
   matters.^[21]^[22] Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania added
   religious freedom to their democratic constitutions, becoming safe
   havens for persecuted religious minorities.^[23]^[24]^[25] The first
   Bible printed in a European language in the Colonies was by German
   immigrant Christopher Sauer.^[26] Nine of the thirteen colonies had
   official public religions. By the time of the Philadelphia Convention
   of 1787, the United States became one of the first countries in the
   world to codify freedom of religion into law, although this originally
   applied only to the federal government, and not to state governments or
   their political subdivisions.^[citation needed]

   Modeling the provisions concerning religion within the Virginia Statute
   for Religious Freedom, the framers of the United States Constitution
   rejected any religious test for office, and the First Amendment
   specifically denied the central government any power to enact any law
   respecting either an establishment of religion, or prohibiting its free
   exercise. In following decades, the animating spirit behind the
   constitution's Establishment Clause led to the disestablishment of the
   official religions within the member states. The framers were mainly
   influenced by secular, Enlightenment ideals, but they also considered
   the pragmatic concerns of minority religious groups who did not want to
   be under the power or influence of a state religion that did not
   represent them.^[27] Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration of
   Independence said: "The priest has been hostile to liberty. He is
   always in alliance with the despot."^[28]

Statistics[edit]

   The following information is an estimation as actual statistics
   constantly vary. According to the CIA,^[29] the following is the
   percentage of followers of different religions in the United States:
     * Christian: (80.2%)
          + Protestant (51.3%)
          + Roman Catholic (23.9%)
          + Mormon (1.7%)
          + Other Christian (1.6%)
          + Remainder of Christians (1.7%)
     * Unaffiliated (12.1%)
     * None (4%)
     * Other/Unspecified (3%)
     * Jewish (1.7%)
     * Buddhist (0.7%)
     * Muslim (0.6%)

Folklore[edit]

   Wiki letter w.svg This section is empty. You can help by adding to it.
                     (October 2012)
   Main article: Folklore of the United States

National holidays[edit]

   Fireworks light up the sky over the Washington Monument. Americans
   traditionally shoot fireworks throughout the night on the Fourth of
   July.
   New York City's Times Square is the best location for the New Year's
   celebrations in the United States with the famous ball drop.
   Inauguration Day 2009 on the west steps of the U.S. Capitol
   Rockefeller Center Christmas tree
   John F. Kennedy unofficially spares a turkey on November 19, 1963. The
   practice of "pardoning" turkeys in this manner becomes a permanent
   tradition in 1989.

   The United States observes holidays derived from events in American
   history, Christian traditions, and national patriarchs.

   Thanksgiving is the principal traditionally American holiday. It
   evolved from the English Pilgrim's custom of giving thanks for one's
   welfare. Thanksgiving is generally celebrated as a family reunion with
   a large afternoon feast. Christmas Day, celebrating the birth of Jesus
   Christ, is widely celebrated and a federal holiday, though a fair
   amount of its current cultural importance is due to secular reasons.
   European colonization has led to some other Christian holidays such as
   Easter, Lent and St. Patrick’s Day to be observed, though with varying
   degrees of religious fidelity.

   Independence Day (also known as the Fourth of July) celebrates the
   anniversary of the country’s Declaration of Independence from Great
   Britain. It is generally observed by parades throughout the day and the
   shooting of fireworks at night.

   Halloween is thought to have evolved from the ancient Celtic/Gaelic
   festival of Samhain, which was introduced in the American colonies by
   Irish settlers. It has become a holiday that is celebrated by children
   and teens who traditionally dress up in costumes and go door to door
   trick-or-treating for candy. It also brings about an emphasis on eerie
   and frightening urban legends and movies.

   Additionally, Mardi Gras, which evolved from the Catholic tradition of
   Carnival, is observed notably in New Orleans, St. Louis, and Mobile,
   Alabama as well as numerous other towns.

   Federally recognized holidays are as follows:
   Date Official Name Remarks
   January 1 New Year's Day Celebrates beginning of the Gregorian calendar
   year. Festivities include counting down to midnight (12:00 am) on the
   preceding night, New Year's Eve. Traditional end of holiday season.
   Third Monday in January Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., or Martin
   Luther King, Jr. Day Honors Martin Luther King, Jr., Civil Rights
   leader, who was actually born on January 15, 1929; combined with other
   holidays in several states.
   First January 20 following a Presidential election Inauguration Day
   Observed only by federal government employees in Washington D.C., and
   the border counties of Maryland and Virginia to relieve traffic
   congestion that occurs with this major event. Swearing-in of President
   of the United States and Vice President of the United States.
   Celebrated every fourth year. Note: Takes place on January 21 if the
   20th is a Sunday (although the President is still privately inaugurated
   on the 20th). If Inauguration Day falls on a Saturday or a Sunday, the
   preceding Friday or following Monday is not a Federal Holiday
   Third Monday in February Washington's Birthday Washington's Birthday
   was first declared a federal holiday by an 1879 act of Congress. The
   Uniform Holidays Act, 1968, shifted the date of the commemoration of
   Washington's Birthday from February 22 to the third Monday in February.
   Many people now refer to this holiday as "Presidents' Day" and consider
   it a day honoring all American presidents. However, neither the Uniform
   Holidays Act nor any subsequent law changed the name of the holiday
   from Washington's Birthday to Presidents' Day.^[30]
   Last Monday in May Memorial Day Honors the nation's war dead from the
   Civil War onwards; marks the unofficial beginning of the summer season.
   (traditionally May 30, shifted by the Uniform Holidays Act 1968)
   July 4 Independence Day Celebrates Declaration of Independence, also
   called the Fourth of July.
   First Monday in September Labor Day Celebrates the achievements of
   workers and the labor movement; marks the unofficial end of the summer
   season.
   Second Monday in October Columbus Day Honors Christopher Columbus,
   traditional discoverer of the Americas. In some areas it is also a
   celebration of Italian culture and heritage. (traditionally October
   12); celebrated as American Indian Heritage Day and Fraternal Day in
   Alabama;^[31] celebrated as Native American Day in South Dakota.^[32]
   In Hawaii, it is celebrated as Discoverer's Day, though is not an
   official state holiday.^[33]
   November 11 Veterans Day Honors all veterans of the United States armed
   forces. A traditional observation is a moment of silence at 11:00 am
   remembering those killed in war. (Commemorates the 1918 armistice,
   which began at "the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh
   month.")
   Fourth Thursday in November Thanksgiving Day Traditionally celebrates
   the giving of thanks for the autumn harvest. Traditionally includes the
   consumption of a turkey dinner. Traditional start of the holiday
   season.
   December 25 Christmas Celebrates the Nativity of Jesus. Some
   people^[who?] consider aspects of this religious holiday, such as
   giving gifts and decorating a Christmas tree, to be secular rather than
   explicitly Christian.
     * Federal Holidays Calendars from the federal Office of Personnel
       Management.

Fashion and dress[edit]

   A pair of blue jeans
   Main article: Fashion in the United States

   Fashion in the United States is eclectic and predominantly informal.
   While Americans' diverse cultural roots are reflected in their
   clothing, particularly those of recent immigrants, cowboy hats and
   boots and leather motorcycle jackets are emblematic of specifically
   American styles.

   Blue jeans were popularized as work clothes in the 1850s by merchant
   Levi Strauss, a German-Jewish immigrant in San Francisco, and adopted
   by many American teenagers a century later. They are worn in every
   state by people of all ages and social classes. Along with
   mass-marketed informal wear in general, blue jeans are arguably one of
   US culture's primary contributions to global fashion.^[34]

   Though informal dress is more common, certain professionals, such as
   bankers and lawyers, traditionally dress formally for work, and some
   occasions, such as weddings, funerals, dances, and some parties,
   typically call for formal wear.

Names[edit]

   Main articles: American names and African-American names

   The United States has few laws governing given names. Traditionally,
   the right to name your child or yourself as you choose has been upheld
   by court rulings and is rooted in the Due Process Clause of the
   fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and the Free
   Speech Clause of the First Amendment. A few restrictions do exist.
   Restrictions vary by state, but most are for the sake of practicality
   (for example: limiting the number of characters due to limitations in
   record keeping software). This freedom, along with the cultural
   diversity in the United States has given rise to a wide variety of
   names and naming trends. Creativity has also long been a part of
   American naming traditions and names have been used to express
   personality, cultural identity, and values^[35]^[36] Naming trends vary
   by race, geographic area, and socioeconomic status. African Americans,
   for instance, have developed a very distinct naming culture.^[36]
   Religious names are very common as well as names inspired by popular
   culture.^[37]

Sports[edit]

   Main article: Sports in the United States
   A typical Baseball diamond as seen from the stadium. Traditionally the
   game is played for nine innings, but can be prolonged if there is a
   tie.
   The opening of College football season is a major part of American
   pastime. Massive marching bands accompanied by cheerleaders and
   colorguard are almost universal at American football games, especially
   during halftime. Although high school bands tend to be much smaller, it
   is rare for a game not to feature a marching band at halftime.

   Baseball is the oldest of the major American team sports. Professional
   baseball dates from 1869 and had no close rivals in popularity until
   the 1960s. Though baseball is no longer the most popular sport,^[38] it
   is still referred to as "the national sport". Also unlike the
   professional levels of the other popular spectator sports in the U.S.,
   Major League Baseball teams play almost every day. The Major League
   Baseball regular season consists of each of the 30 teams playing 162
   games from April to September. The season ends with the postseason and
   World Series in October.

   American football, known in the United States as simply "football", now
   attracts more television viewers than any other sport and is considered
   to be the most popular sport in the United States.^[39] The 32-team
   National Football League (NFL) is the most popular professional
   American football league. The National Football League differs from the
   other three major pro sports leagues in that each of its 32 teams plays
   one game a week over 17 weeks, for a total of 16 games with one bye
   week for each team. The NFL season lasts from September to December,
   ending with the playoffs and Super Bowl in January and February. Its
   championship game, the Super Bowl, has often been the highest rated
   television show, with an audience of over 100 million viewers
   annually.^[citation needed]

   College football also attracts audiences of millions. Some communities,
   particularly in rural areas, place great emphasis on their local high
   school football team. American football games usually include
   cheerleaders and marching bands, which aim to raise school spirit and
   entertain the crowd at half-time.

   Basketball is another major sport, represented professionally by the
   National Basketball Association. It was invented in Springfield,
   Massachusetts in 1891, by Canadian-born physical education teacher
   James Naismith. College basketball is also popular, due in large part
   to the NCAA men's Division I basketball tournament in March, also known
   as March Madness.

   Ice hockey is the fourth leading professional team sport. Always a
   mainstay of Great Lakes and New England-area culture, the sport gained
   tenuous footholds in regions like the American South since the early
   1990s, as the National Hockey League pursued a policy of
   expansion.^[40]

   Lacrosse is a team sport of American and Canadian Native American
   origin, it's the fastest growing sport in the United States.^[41]
   Lacrosse is most popular in the East Coast area. NLL and MLL are the
   national box and outdoor lacrosse leagues, respectively, and have
   increased their following in recent years. Also, many of the top
   Division I college lacrosse teams draw upwards of 7–10,000 for a game,
   especially in the Mid-Atlantic and New England areas.

   The sport called "football" in many countries is typically called
   soccer in the United States. A nineteen-team professional league, Major
   League Soccer, plays from March to October, but its television audience
   and overall popularity lag behind other American professional
   sports.^[42] However, soccer is very popular as a participation sport,
   particularly among youths, and the US national soccer teams are
   competitive internationally.

   Boxing and horse racing were once^[when?] the most watched individual
   sports, but they have been eclipsed by golf and auto racing,
   particularly NASCAR.^[citation needed] Other popular sports are tennis,
   softball, rodeo, swimming, water polo, fencing, shooting sports,
   hunting, volleyball, skiing, snowboarding, skateboarding, cycling, MMA,
   wrestling, weightlifting and rugby.

   The United States is unusually competitive in women's sports, a fact
   usually attributed to the Title IX antidiscrimination law, which
   requires most American colleges to give equal funding to men's and
   women's sports.^[43] Despite that, however, women's sports are not
   nearly as popular among spectators as men's sports.

   The United States enjoys a great deal of success both in the Summer
   Olympics and Winter Olympics, constantly being ranked in the top
   rankings.

Sports and community culture[edit]

   Homecoming is an annual tradition of the United States. People, towns,
   high schools and colleges come together, usually in late September or
   early October, to welcome back former residents and alumni. It is built
   around a central event, such as a banquet, a parade, and most often, a
   game of American football, or, on occasion, basketball, wrestling or
   ice hockey. When celebrated by schools, the activities vary. However,
   they usually consist of a football game, played on the school's home
   football field, activities for students and alumni, a parade featuring
   the school's marching band and sports teams, and the coronation of a
   Homecoming Queen.

   American high schools commonly field football, basketball, baseball,
   softball, volleyball, soccer, golf, swimming, track and field, and
   cross-country teams as well.

Cuisine[edit]

   Main article: Cuisine of the United States

   The cuisine of the United States is extremely diverse, owing to the
   vastness of the continent, the relatively large population (1/3 of a
   billion people) and the number of native and immigrant influences.
   Mainstream American culinary arts are similar to those in other Western
   countries. Wheat and corn are the primary cereal grains. Traditional
   American cuisine uses ingredients such as turkey, white-tailed deer
   venison, potatoes, sweet potatoes, corn, squash, and maple syrup,
   indigenous foods employed by American Indians and early European
   settlers.

   The types of food served at home vary greatly and depend upon the
   region of the country and the family's own cultural heritage. Recent
   immigrants tend to eat food similar to that of their country of origin,
   and Americanized versions of these cultural foods, such as American
   Chinese cuisine, Tex-Mex (Mexican-American cuisine) or Italian-American
   cuisine often eventually appear; an example is Vietnamese cuisine,
   Korean cuisine and Thai cuisine. German cuisine has a profound impact
   on American cuisine, especially mid-western cuisine, with potatoes,
   noodles, roasts, stews and cakes/pastries being the most iconic
   ingredients in both cuisines.^[7] Dishes such as the hamburger, pot
   roast, baked ham and hot dogs are examples of American dishes derived
   from German cuisine.^[44]^[45]

   Different regions of the United States have their own cuisine and
   styles of cooking. The state of Louisiana, for example, is known for
   its Cajun and Creole cooking. Cajun and Creole cooking are influenced
   by French, Acadian, and Haitian cooking, although the dishes themselves
   are original and unique. Examples include Crawfish Etouffee, Red Beans
   and Rice, Seafood or Chicken Gumbo, Jambalaya, and Boudin. Italian,
   German, Hungarian and Chinese influences, traditional Native American,
   Caribbean, Mexican and Greek dishes have also diffused into the general
   American repertoire. It is not uncommon for a "middle-class" family
   from "middle America" to eat, for example, restaurant pizza, home-made
   pizza, enchiladas con carne, chicken paprikas, beef stroganof and
   bratwurst with sauerkraut for dinner throughout a single week.

   Soul food, developed by African slaves, is popular around the South and
   among many African Americans elsewhere. Syncretic cuisines such as
   Louisiana creole, Cajun, Pennsylvania Dutch, and Tex-Mex are regionally
   important. Iconic American dishes such as apple pie, fried chicken,
   pizza, hamburgers, and hot dogs derive from the recipes of various
   immigrants and domestic innovations. French fries, Mexican dishes such
   as burritos and tacos, and pasta dishes freely adapted from Italian
   sources are consumed.^[46]

   Americans generally prefer coffee to tea, with more than half the adult
   population drinking at least one cup a day.^[47] Marketing by U.S.
   industries is largely responsible for making orange juice and milk (now
   often fat-reduced) ubiquitous breakfast beverages.^[48] During the
   1980s and 1990s, Americans' caloric intake rose 24%;^[46] frequent
   dining at fast food outlets is associated with what health officials
   call the American "obesity epidemic." Highly sweetened soft drinks are
   popular; sugared beverages account for 9% of the average American's
   daily caloric intake.^[49]

   Hamburgers and fries, as well as doughnuts are considered American
   foods.^[50]^[51]

                     Some representative American foods

     * Traditional Thanksgiving dinner with turkey, dressing, sweet
       potatoes, and cranberry sauce.
     * A cream-based New England chowder, traditionally made with clams
       and potatoes.
     * A Caesar salad containing croutons, Parmesan cheese, lemon juice,
       olive oil, Worcestershire, and pepper.
     * Creole Jambalaya with shrimp, ham, tomato, and Andouille sausage.
     * Chicken Fried Steak (alternatively known as Country Fried Steak)
     * California club pizza with avocados and tomatoes.
     * A submarine sandwich, which includes a variety of Italian luncheon
       meats.
     * American style breakfast with pancakes, maple syrup, sausage links,
       bacon strips, and fried eggs.
     * A hot dog sausage topped with beef chili, white onions and mustard.
     * A barbecue pulled pork sandwich with coleslaw as the side dish.
     * A meatloaf with a tomato sauce topping.
     * An apple cobbler dessert.

Family structure[edit]

   Further information: Family structure in the United States
   American family structure has no particular household arrangement being
   prevalent enough to be identified as the average.^[52]

   Family arrangements in the United States reflect the nature of
   contemporary American society, as they always have. Although the
   nuclear family concept (two-married adults with biological children)
   holds a special place in the mindset of Americans, it is single-parent
   families, childless/childfree couples, and fused families which now
   constitute the majority of families.^[citation needed] A person may
   grow up in a single-parent family, go on to marry and live in childless
   couple arrangement, then get divorced, live as a single for a couple of
   years, remarry, have children and live in a nuclear family
   arrangement.^[1]^[52]

     "The nuclear family... is the idealized version of what most people
     think when they think of "family..." The old definition of what a
     family is... the nuclear family- no longer seems adequate to cover
     the wide diversity of household arrangements we see today, according
     to many social scientists (Edwards 1991; Stacey 1996). Thus has
     arisen the term postmodern family, which is meant to describe the
     great variability in family forms, including single-parent families
     and child-free couples."- Brian K. Williams, Stacey C. Sawyer, Carl
     M. Wahlstrom, Marriages, Families & Intinamte Relationships,
     2005.^[52]

   Year Families (69.7%) Non-families (31.2%)
   Married couples (52.5%) Single Parents Other blood relatives Singles
   (25.5%) Other non-family
   Nuclear family Without children Male Female
   2000 24.1% 28.7% 9.9% 7% 10.7% 14.8% 5.7%
   1970 40.3% 30.3% 5.2% 5.5% 5.6% 11.5% 1.7%

   Single-parent households are households consisting of a single adult
   (most often a woman) and one or more children. In the single-parent
   household, one parent typically raises the children with little to no
   help from the other. This parent is the sole "breadwinner" of the
   family and thus these households are particularly vulnerable
   economically. They have higher rates of poverty, and children of these
   households are more likely to have educational problems.^[citation
   needed]

Youth Dependence[edit]

   Other changes to the landscape of American family arrangements include
   dual-income earner households and delayed independence among American
   youths. Whereas most families in the 1950s and 1960s relied on one
   income earner, most commonly the husband, the vast majority of family
   households now have two-income earners.^[citation
   needed]^[clarification needed]

   Another change is the increasing age at which young Americans leave
   their parental home. Traditionally, a person past "college age" who
   lived with their parent(s) was viewed negatively, but today it is not
   uncommon for children to live with their parents until their
   mid-twenties. This trend can be mostly attributed to rising living
   costs that far exceed those in decades past. Thus, many young adults
   now remain with their parents well past their mid-20s. This topic was a
   cover article of TIME magazine in 2005.^[citation needed]

   Exceptions to the custom of leaving home in one's mid-20s can occur
   especially among Italian and Hispanic Americans, and in expensive urban
   real estate markets such as New York City,^[53] California,^[54] and
   Honolulu,^[55] where monthly rents commonly exceed $1000 a month.

Housing[edit]

   Historically, Americans mainly lived rural lives, with a few important
   cities of moderate size. Following World War II, however, Americans
   began living in increasing numbers in the suburbs, belts around major
   cities with higher density than rural areas, but much lower than urban
   areas. This move has been attributed to many factors such as the
   automobile, the availability of large tracts of land, the convenience
   of more and longer paved roads, increasing violence in urban centers
   (see white flight), and the lower expense of housing.^[citation needed]

   These new single-family houses were usually one or two stories tall,
   and often were part of large contracts of homes built by a single
   developer and often with little variation (sometimes referred to as
   cookie cutter houses or homes). Houses were separated. The resulting
   low-density development was given the pejorative label urban
   sprawl.^[citation needed]

   This has changed;^[how?]^[when?] white flight has reversed, with
   Yuppies and upper-middle-class, empty nest Baby Boomers returning to
   urban living, usually in condominia, such as in New York City's Lower
   East Side, Chicago's South Loop and Miami's Brickell Neighborhood. The
   result has been the displacement of many poorer, inner-city
   residents.^[citation needed]

   American cities with housing prices near the national median have also
   been losing the middle income neighborhoods, those with median income
   between 80% and 120% of the metropolitan area's median household
   income. Here, the more affluent members of the middle class, who are
   also often referred to as being professional or upper middle class,
   have left in search of larger homes in more exclusive suburbs. This
   trend is largely attributed to the Middle-class squeeze, which has
   caused a starker distinction between the statistical middle class and
   the more privileged members of the middle class.^[56] In more expensive
   areas such as California, however, another trend has been taking place
   where an influx of more affluent middle-class households has displaced
   those in the actual middle of society and converted former
   middle-middle-class neighborhoods into upper-middle-class
   neighborhoods.^[57]
   Tract housing in Kentucky near Cincinnati, Ohio

   The population of rural areas has been declining over time as more and
   more people migrate to cities for work and entertainment. The great
   exodus from the farms came in the 1940s; in recent years fewer than 2%
   of the population lives on farms (though others live in the countryside
   and commute to work). Electricity and telephone, and sometimes cable
   and Internet services are available to all but the most remote regions.

   About half of Americans now live in what is known as the suburbs. The
   suburban nuclear family has been identified as part of the "American
   Dream": a married couple with children owning a house in the suburbs.
   This archetype is reinforced by mass media, religious practices, and
   government policies and is based on traditions from Anglo-Saxon
   cultures. One of the biggest differences in suburban living as compared
   to urban living is the housing occupied by the families. The suburbs
   are filled with single-family homes separated from retail districts,
   industrial areas, and sometimes even public schools. However, many
   American suburbs are incorporating these districts on smaller scales,
   attracting more people to these communities.^[citation needed]

   Housing in urban areas may include more apartments and semi-attached
   homes than in the suburbs or small towns. Aside from housing, the major
   difference from suburban living is the density and diversity of many
   different subcultures, as well as retail and manufacturing buildings
   mixed with housing in urban areas.^[citation needed]

Automobiles and commuting[edit]

   Further information: United States technological and industrial history
   and Passenger vehicles in the United States

   Due to the low overall population density as well as urban sprawl, the
   United States is one of the few developed nations where most people
   commute by car.

   The rise of suburbs and the need for workers to commute to cities
   brought about the popularization of automobiles. In 2001, 90% of
   Americans drove to work in cars.^[58] Lower energy and land costs favor
   the production of relatively large, powerful cars. The culture in the
   1950s and 1960s often catered to the automobile with motels and
   drive-in restaurants. Outside of relatively few urban areas, it is
   considered a necessity for most Americans to own and drive cars. New
   York City is the only locality in the United States where more than
   half of all households do not own a car.^[58]

Social class and work[edit]

   Main article: Social class in the United States

   Though most Americans in the 21st century identify themselves as middle
   class, American society and its culture are considerably
   fragmented.^[1]^[59]^[60] Social class, generally described as a
   combination of educational attainment, income and occupational
   prestige, is one of the greatest cultural influences in America.^[1]
   Nearly all cultural aspects of mundane interactions and consumer
   behavior in the U.S. are guided by a person's location within the
   country's social structure.

   Distinct lifestyles, consumption patterns and values are associated
   with different classes. Early sociologist-economist Thorstein Veblen,
   for example, noted that those at the very top of the social ladder
   engage in conspicuous leisure as well as conspicuous consumption.
   Upper-middle-class persons commonly identify education and being
   cultured as prime values. Persons in this particular social class tend
   to speak in a more direct manner that projects authority, knowledge and
   thus credibility. They often tend to engage in the consumption of
   so-called mass luxuries, such as designer label clothing. A strong
   preference for natural materials and organic foods as well as a strong
   health consciousness tend to be prominent features of the upper middle
   class. American middle-class individuals in general value expanding
   one's horizon, partially because they are more educated and can afford
   greater leisure and travels. Working-class individuals take great pride
   in doing what they consider to be "real work," and keep very close-knit
   kin networks that serve as a safeguard against frequent economic
   instability.^[1]^[61]^[62]
   Hours worked in different countries according to UN data in a CNN
   report.^[63]

   Working-class Americans as well as many of those in the middle class
   may also face occupation alienation. In contrast to upper-middle-class
   professionals who are mostly hired to conceptualize, supervise and
   share their thoughts, many Americans have little autonomy or creative
   latitude in the workplace.^[64] As a result white collar professionals
   tend to be significantly more satisfied with their work.^[65]^[66] More
   recently those in the center of the income strata, who may still
   identify as middle class, have faced increasing economic
   insecurity,^[67] supporting the idea of a working-class majority.^[68]

   Political behavior is affected by class; more affluent individuals are
   more likely to vote, and education and income affect whether
   individuals tend to vote for the Democratic or Republican party. Income
   also had a significant impact on health as those with higher incomes
   had better access to health care facilities, higher life expectancy,
   lower infant mortality rate and increased health
   consciousness.^[citation needed] This is particularly noticeable with
   black voters who are often socially conservative, yet overwhelmingly
   vote Democratic.^[69]^[70]

   In the United States occupation is one of the prime factors of social
   class and is closely linked to an individual’s identity. The average
   work week in the U.S. for those employed full-time was 42.9 hours long
   with 30% of the population working more than 40 hours a week.^[71] The
   Average American worker earned $16.64 an hour in the first two quarters
   of 2006.^[72] Overall Americans worked more than their counterparts in
   other developed post-industrial nations. While the average worker in
   Denmark enjoyed 30 days of vacation annually, the average American had
   16 annual vacation days.^[73]

   In 2000 the average American worked 1,978 hours per year, 500 hours
   more than the average German, yet 100 hours less than the average
   Czech. Overall the U.S. labor force is one of the most productive in
   the world, largely due to its workers working more than those in any
   other post-industrial country (excluding South Korea).^[63] Americans
   generally hold working and being productive in high regard; being busy
   and working extensively may also serve as the means to obtain
   esteem.^[62]

Race and ancestry[edit]

   Ambox current red.svg
   This section is outdated. Please update this article to reflect recent
   events or newly available information. (August 2013)
   Main article: Race in the United States
   Median household income along ethnic lines in the United States

   Race in the United States is based on physical characteristics and skin
   color and has played an essential part in shaping American society even
   before the nation's conception.^[1] Until the civil rights movement of
   the 1960s, racial minorities in the United States faced
   institutionalized discrimination and social as well as economic
   marginalization.^[74] Today the U.S. Department of Commerce's Bureau of
   the Census recognizes four races, Native American or American Indian,
   African American, Asian and White (European American). According to the
   U.S. government, Hispanic Americans do not constitute a race, but
   rather an ethnic group. During the 2000 U.S. Census Whites made up
   75.1% of the population with those being Hispanic or Latino
   constituting the nation's prevalent minority with 12.5% of the
   population. African Americans made up 12.3% of the total population,
   3.6% were Asian American and 0.7% were Native American.^[75]

   The Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution—ratified on
   Dec 6, 1865—abolished slavery in the United States. The northern states
   had outlawed slavery in their territory in the late 18th and early 19th
   century, though their industrial economies relied on raw materials
   produced by slaves. Following the Reconstruction period in the 1870s,
   an apartheid regulation emerged in the Southern states named the Jim
   Crow laws that provided for legal segregation. Lynching was practiced
   throughout the U.S., including in the Northern states, until the 1930s,
   while continuing well into the civil rights movement in the South.^[74]

   Chinese Americans were earlier marginalized as well during a
   significant proportion of U.S. history. Between 1882 and 1943 the
   United States instituted the Chinese Exclusion Act barring Chinese
   immigrants from entering the U.S. During the second world war roughly
   120,000 Japanese Americans, 62% of whom were U.S. citizens,^[76] were
   imprisoned in Japanese internment camps by the U.S. government
   following the attacks on Pearl Harbor, an American Military Base, by
   Japanese troops.

   Due to exclusion from or marginalization by earlier mainstream society,
   there emerged a unique sub-culture among the racial minorities in the
   United States. During the 1920s, Harlem, New York became home to the
   Harlem Renaissance. Music styles such as Jazz, Blues, Rap, Rock and
   roll as well as numerous folk-songs such as Blue Tail Fly (Jimmy Crack
   Corn) originated within the realms of African American culture, and was
   later on adopted by the mainstream.^[74] Chinatowns can be found in
   many cities across the country and Asian cuisine has become a common
   staple in mainstream America. The Hispanic community has also had a
   dramatic impact on American culture. Today, Catholics are the largest
   religious denomination in the United States and out-number Protestants
   in the South-west and California.^[77] Mariachi music and Mexican
   cuisine are commonly found throughout the Southwest, with some Latin
   dishes, such as burritos and tacos, found anywhere in the nation.

   Economic variance and substantive segregation, is commonplace in the
   United States. Asian Americans have median household income and
   educational attainment exceeding that of other races. African
   Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans have considerably lower
   income and education than do White Americans or Asian
   Americans.^[78]^[79] In 2005 the median household income of Whites was
   62.5% higher than that of African American, nearly one-quarter of whom
   live below the poverty line.^[78] 46.9% of homicide victims in the
   United States are African American.^[74]^[80]

   After the attacks by Muslim terrorists on September 11, 2001,
   discrimination against Arabs and Muslims in the U.S. rose
   significantly. The American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC)
   reported an increase in hate speech, cases of airline discrimination,
   hate crimes, police misconduct as well as racial profiling.^[81]

Death and funerals[edit]

   This section may stray from the topic of the article. Please help
   improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page. (January
   2013)
   Mount Auburn Cemetery

   It is customary for Americans to hold a wake in a funeral home within a
   couple days of the death of a loved one. The body of the deceased may
   be embalmed and dressed in fine clothing if there will be an
   open-casket viewing. Traditional Jewish and Muslim practice include a
   ritual bath and no embalming. Friends, relatives and acquaintances
   gather, often from distant parts of the country, to "pay their last
   respects" to the deceased. Flowers are brought to the coffin and
   sometimes eulogies, elegies, personal anecdotes or group prayers are
   recited. Otherwise, the attendees sit, stand or kneel in quiet
   contemplation or prayer. Kissing the corpse on the forehead is typical
   among Italian Americans^[82] and others. Condolences are also offered
   to the widow or widower and other close relatives.

   A funeral may be held immediately afterwards or the next day. The
   funeral ceremony varies according to religion and culture. American
   Catholics typically hold a funeral mass in a church, which sometimes
   takes the form of a Requiem mass. Jewish Americans may hold a service
   in a synagogue or temple. Pallbearers carry the coffin of the deceased
   to the hearse, which then proceeds in a procession to the place of
   final repose, usually a cemetery. The unique Jazz funeral of New
   Orleans features joyous and raucous music and dancing during the
   procession.

   Mount Auburn Cemetery (founded in 1831) is known as "America's first
   garden cemetery."^[83] American cemeteries created since are
   distinctive for their park-like setting. Rows of graves are covered by
   lawns and are interspersed with trees and flowers. Headstones,
   mausoleums, statuary or simple plaques typically mark off the
   individual graves. Cremation is another common practice in the United
   States, though it is frowned upon by various religions. The ashes of
   the deceased are usually placed in an urn, which may be kept in a
   private house, or they are interred. Sometimes the ashes are released
   into the atmosphere. The "sprinkling" or "scattering" of the ashes may
   be part of an informal ceremony, often taking place at a scenic natural
   feature (a cliff, lake or mountain) that was favored by the deceased.

   A so-called death industry has developed in the United States that has
   replaced earlier, more informal traditions. Before the popularity of
   funeral homes, people usually held wakes in the Parlour rooms of
   private houses.^[citation needed]

Sociological issues[edit]

Marriage and divorce[edit]

   Main articles: Marriage in the United States and Divorce in the United
   States
   See also: Cohabitation in the United States

   Marriage laws are established by individual states. The typical wedding
   involves a couple proclaiming their commitment to one another in front
   of their close relatives and friends, often presided over by a
   religious figure such as a minister, priest, or rabbi, depending upon
   the faith of the couple. In traditional Christian ceremonies, the
   bride's father will "give away" (hand off) the bride to the groom.
   Secular weddings are also common, often presided over by a judge,
   Justice of the Peace, or other municipal official. Same-sex marriage is
   currently legal in several states; others offer domestic partnerships.
   Polygamy is universally banned.

   Divorce is the province of state governments, so divorce law varies
   from state to state. Prior to the 1970s, divorcing spouses had to
   allege that the other spouse was guilty of a crime or sin like
   abandonment or adultery; when spouses simply could not get along,
   lawyers were forced to manufacture "uncontested" divorces. The no-fault
   divorce revolution began in 1969 in California; New York and South
   Dakota were the last states to begin allowing no-fault divorce.
   No-fault divorce on the grounds of "irreconcilable differences" is now
   available in all states. However, many states have recently required
   separation periods prior to a formal divorce decree.

   State law provides for child support where children are involved, and
   sometimes for alimony. "Married adults now divorce two-and-a-half times
   as often as adults did 20 years ago and four times as often as they did
   50 years ago... between 40% and 60% of new marriages will eventually
   end in divorce. The probability within... the first five years is 20%,
   and the probability of its ending within the first 10 years is 33%...
   Perhaps 25% of children ages 16 and under live with a stepparent."^[84]
   The median length for a marriage in the U.S. today is 11 years with 90%
   of all divorces being settled out of court.

Race relations[edit]

   Main articles: Racism, Racism in the United States and Race in the
   United States

   White Americans (non-Hispanic/Latino and Hispanic/Latino) are the
   racial majority, with a 72% share of the U.S. population, according to
   the 2010 US Census.^[85] Hispanic and Latino Americans comprise 15% of
   the population, making up the largest ethnic minority.^[86] Black
   Americans are the largest racial minority, comprising nearly 13% of the
   population.^[85]^[87] The White, non-Hispanic or Latino population
   comprises 63% of the nation's total.^[86]

   Throughout most of the country's history following independence from
   Great Britain, the majority race in the United States has been
   Caucasian, and the largest racial minority has been African-Americans.
   This relationship has historically been the most important one since
   the founding of the United States. Currently, most African-Americans
   are descendants of African slaves imported to the United States, though
   some are more recent immigrants or their descendants. Slavery existed
   in the United States at the time of the country's formation in the
   1770s. The U.S. banned importation of slaves in 1808. Slavery was
   partially abolished by the Emancipation Proclamation issued by
   president Abraham Lincoln in 1862 for slaves in the Southeastern United
   States during the Civil War. Slavery was rendered illegal by the
   passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
   Jim Crow Laws prevented full use of African American citizenship until
   the 20th century. The Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s and the Civil
   Rights Act of 1964 outlawed official or legal segregation in public
   places or limited access to minorities.

   Relations between white Americans and other racial or ethnic groups
   have been a source of tension at various times in U.S. history. With
   the advent of European colonization, and continuing into the early
   years of the republic, relations between whites and Native American was
   a significant issue. In 1882, in response to Chinese immigration due to
   the Gold Rush and the labor needed for the Transcontinental Railroad,
   the U.S. signed into law the Chinese Exclusion Act which banned
   immigration by Chinese people into the U.S. In the late 20th century,
   the growth of the Hispanic population in the U.S., fueled largely by
   Mexican immigration, generated debate over policies such as English as
   the official language and reform to immigration policies.

   A huge majority of Americans of all races disapprove of racism.
   Nevertheless, some Americans continue to hold negative racial/ethnic
   stereotypes about various racial and ethnic groups. Professor Imani
   Perry, of Princeton University, has argued that contemporary racism in
   the United States "is frequently unintentional or unacknowledged on the
   part of the actor”,^[88] believing that racism mostly stems
   unconsciously from below the level of cognition.^[89]

Drugs and alcohol[edit]

   This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (October 2012)
   Further information: History of United States drug prohibition
   "Just Say No" paraphernalia at the Reagan Library display

   American attitudes towards drugs and alcoholic beverages have evolved
   considerably throughout the country's history. In the 19th century,
   alcohol was readily available and consumed, and no laws restricted the
   use of other drugs. Attitudes on drug addiction started to change,
   resulting in the Harrison Act, which eventually became proscriptive.

   A movement to ban alcoholic beverages, called the Temperance movement,
   emerged in the late 19th century. Several American Protestant religious
   groups, as well as women's groups such as the Women's Christian
   Temperance Union, supported the movement. In 1919, Prohibitionists
   succeeded in amending the Constitution to prohibit the sale of alcohol.
   Although the Prohibition period did result in lowering alcohol
   consumption overall,^[citation needed] banning alcohol outright proved
   to be unworkable, as the previously legitimate distillery industry was
   replaced by criminal gangs that trafficked in alcohol. Prohibition was
   repealed in 1933. States and localities retained the right to remain
   "dry", and to this day, a handful still do.

   During the Vietnam War era, attitudes swung well away from prohibition.
   Commentators noted that an 18-year-old could be drafted to war but
   could not buy a beer.

   Since 1980, the trend has been toward greater restrictions on alcohol
   and drug use. The focus this time, however, has been to criminalize
   behaviors associated with alcohol, rather than attempt to prohibit
   consumption outright. New York was the first state to enact tough
   drunk-driving laws in 1980; since then all other states have followed
   suit. All states have also banned the purchase of alcoholic beverages
   by individuals under 21.

   A "Just Say No to Drugs" movement replaced the more liberal ethos of
   the 1960s. This led to stricter drug laws and greater police latitude
   in drug cases. Drugs are, however, widely available, and 16% of
   Americans 12 and older used an illicit drug in 2012.^[90]

   Since the 1990s, marijuana use has become increasingly tolerated in
   America, with a number of states allowing the use of marijuana for
   medical purposes. In most states marijuana is still illegal without
   medical prescription. In the 2012 general election, voters in the
   states of Colorado and Washington approved the legalization of
   marijuana for recreational use. Marijuana is classified as illegal
   under federal law.

Group affiliations[edit]

   As the United States is a diverse nation, there are numerous
   organizations and social groups, and individuals may derive their group
   affiliated identity from a variety of sources. Many Americans,
   especially white collar professionals belong to professional
   organizations such as the APA, ASA or ATFLC, although books like
   Bowling Alone indicate that Americans affiliate with these sorts of
   groups less often than they did in the 1950s and 1960s. Today,
   Americans derive a great deal of their identity through their work and
   professional affiliation, especially among individuals higher on the
   economic ladder. Recently professional identification has led to many
   clerical and low-level employees giving their occupations new, more
   respectable titles, such as "Sanitation service engineer" instead of
   "Janitor."^[1]

   Additionally many Americans belong to non-profit organizations and
   religious establishments and may volunteer their services to such
   organizations. Rotary International, the Knights of Columbus or even
   the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals are examples of
   such non-profit and mostly volunteer-run organizations. Ethnicity plays
   another important role in providing some Americans with group
   identity,^[74] especially among those who recently immigrated.^[91]

   Many American cities are home to ethnic enclaves such as a Chinatown
   and Little Italies. Local patriotism may be also provide group
   identity. For example, a person may be particularly proud to be from
   California or New York City, and may display clothing from local sports
   team.

   Political lobbies such as the AARP, ADL, NAACP, NOW and GLAAD (examples
   being civil rights activist organizations) not only provide individuals
   with a sentiment of intra-group allegiance but also increase their
   political representation in the nation's political system. Combined,
   profession, ethnicity, religious, and other group affiliations have
   provided Americans with a multitude of options to derive group based
   identity from.^[1]

Volunteerism[edit]

   De Tocqueville first noted, in 1835, the American attitude towards
   helping others in need. A 2011 Charities Aid Foundation study found
   that Americans were the first most willing to help a stranger and
   donate time and money in the world at 60%. Many low-level crimes are
   punished by assigning hours of "community service", a requirement that
   the offender perform volunteer work;^[92] some high schools also
   require community service to graduate. Since US citizens are required
   to attend jury duty, they can be jurors in legal proceedings.

Military culture[edit]

   Main articles: United States Armed Forces, U.S. Soldier's Creed,
   LDRSHIP, Culture of the United States Army, Culture of the United
   States Navy, Culture of the USAF, Culture of the USAAF and Culture of
   the United States Marine Corps

   From the time of its inception the military played a decisive role in
   the history of the United States. A sense of national unity and
   identity was forged out of the victorious First Barbary War and Second
   Barbary War, as well as the War of 1812. Even so, the Founders were
   suspicious of a permanent military force and not until the outbreak of
   World War II did a large standing army become officially established.
   The National Security Act of 1947, adopted following World War II and
   during the onset of the Cold War, created the modern U.S. military
   framework; the Act merged previously Cabinet-level Department of War
   and the Department of the Navy into the National Military Establishment
   (renamed the Department of Defense in 1949), headed by the Secretary of
   Defense; and created the Department of the Air Force and National
   Security Council.

   The U.S. military is one of the largest militaries in terms of number
   of personnel. It draws its manpower from a large pool of paid
   volunteers; although conscription has been used in the past in various
   times of both war and peace, it has not been used since 1972. As of
   2011, the United States spends about $550 billion annually to fund its
   military forces,^[93] and appropriates approximately $160 billion to
   fund Overseas Contingency Operations. Put together, the United States
   constitutes roughly 43 percent of the world's military expenditures.
   The U.S. armed forces as a whole possess large quantities of advanced
   and powerful equipment, along with widespread placement of forces
   around the world, giving them significant capabilities in both defense
   and power projection.

   There is and has been a strong military culture among those on active
   duty, those not on active duty, as well as veterans.

Gun culture[edit]

   Main article: Gun culture in the United States
   Navy Junior ROTC cadets from Hamilton High School, Ohio, practice
   marksmanship at the Fire Arms Training Simulator at the Naval Station
   Great Lakes.

   In sharp contrast to most other developed nations, firearms laws in the
   United States are permissive and private gun ownership is common, with
   just under half of American households containing at least one
   firearm.^[94] In fact, there are more privately owned firearms in the
   United States than in any other country, both per capita and in
   total.^[95] Rates of gun ownership vary significantly by region and by
   state, with gun ownership most common in Alaska, the Frontier Strip,
   the Mountain States and the South, and least prevalent in Hawaii, the
   island territories, California, and the Northeast megalopolis. Gun
   ownership tends to be more common in rural than in urban areas.^[96]

   Hunting, plinking and target shooting are popular pastimes, although
   ownership of firearms for purely utilitarian purposes such as personal
   protection is common as well. In fact, personal protection was the most
   common reason given for gun ownership in a 2013 Gallup poll of gun
   owners, at 60%.^[97] Ownership of handguns, while not uncommon, is less
   common than ownership of long guns. Gun ownership is considerably more
   prevalent among men than among women, with men being approximately four
   times more likely than women to report owning guns.^[98]

Other aspects[edit]

   In the federal government of the United States, responsibilities that
   are usually in a cultural minister's portfolio elsewhere are divided
   among the President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities, the Federal
   Communications Commission, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the
   U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Department of the Interior, the
   U.S. Department of State, the National Endowment for the Humanities,
   the National Endowment for the Arts, the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts,
   the Library of Congress, the Smithsonian Institution, and the National
   Gallery of Art. However, many state and city governments have a
   department dedicated to cultural affairs.

Influence[edit]

   The Hollywood cinema industry has been very influential on American
   culture, and to some extent in global culture through transmission of
   American movies overseas and as other film cultures like Bollywood have
   striven to emulate the American model.

   The United States has influenced the cultures of many other countries,
   but as countries around the world become more inter-connected and
   inter-dependent, the general cultural trends (of the US and other
   countries) head towards multiculturalism and sociocultural
   globalization.

See also[edit]

     * Americana
     * American studies
     * 1950s' American automobile culture
     * Body contact and personal space in the United States
     * Culture of the Southern United States
     * Folklore of the United States
     * Etiquette in North America
     * Philanthropy in the United States
     * Protestant work ethic
     * Work and Travel USA (organization)
     * America 24/7 (book)
     * Stereotypes of Americans

References[edit]

    1. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e ^f ^g ^h ^i Thompson, William; Joseph Hickey
       (2005). Society in Focus. Boston, MA: Pearson. ISBN 0-205-41365-X.
    2. ^ Kirschbaum, Erik (1986). The eradication of German culture in the
       United States, 1917-1918. H.-D. Heinz. p. 155. ISBN 3-88099-617-2.
    3. ^ ^a ^b "Mr. Jefferson and the giant moose: natural history in
       early America", Lee Alan Dugatkin. University of Chicago Press,
       2009. ISBN 0-226-16914-6, ISBN 978-0-226-16914-9. University of
       Chicago Press, 2009. Chapter x.
    4. ^ McDonald, James (2010) Interplay:Communication, Memory, and Media
       in the United States. Goettingen: Cuvillier, p. 120. ISBN
       3-86955-322-7.
    5. ^ http://www.hoover.org/publications/hoover-digest/article/132541
    6. ^ Clack, George, et al. (September 1997). "Chapter 1". One from
       Many, Portrait of the USA. United States Information Agency.
    7. ^ ^a ^b Adams, J.Q.; Pearlie Strother-Adams (2001). Dealing with
       Diversity. Chicago, IL: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company.
       ISBN 0-7872-8145-X.
    8. ^ "American Religious Identification Survey".
       www.gc.cuny.edu. ^[dead link]
    9. ^ Hine, Darlene; William C. Hine; Stanley Harrold (2006). The
       African American Odyssey. Boston, MA: Pearson.
   10. ^ 1989 book, Albion's Seed (ISBN 0195069056), Paul Berinde
   11. ^ 2011, American Nations, ISBN 978-0143122029, Penguin Books
   12. ^ "Selected Social Characteristics in the United States: 2007".
       United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 2008-10-09.
   13. ^ United States, CIA World Facebook.
   14. ^ "Famous American Trials: John Peter Zenger Trial 1735", Doug
       Linder. University of Missouri-Kansas City. 2001. Accessed
       September 9, 2010.
   15. ^ "American history told by contemporaries..., Volume 2", John
       Gould Curtis. The Macmillan company, 1919. p. 192.
   16. ^ Meyers, Jeffrey (1999). Hemingway: A Biography. New York: Da
       Capo, p. 139. ISBN 0-306-80890-0.
   17. ^ Dell Upton. 1998. "Architecture in the United States-Oxford
       history of art." pp. 11 ff. ISBN 0-19-284217-X
   18. ^ "U.S. Stands Alone in its Embrace of Religion". Pew Global
       Attitudes Project. Retrieved January 1, 2007.
   19. ^ O'Hehir, Andrew (20 January 2013). "Why do we care if Lance
       apologizes?". Salon. Salon Media Group. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
   20. ^ M. Schmidt, Pilgerväter, in Die Religion in Geschichte und
       Gegenwart, 3. Auflage, Band V, Tübingen (Germany), col. 384
   21. ^ Allan Weinstein and David Rubel (2002), The Story of America:
       Freedom and Crisis from Settlement to Superpower, DK Publishing,
       New York, N.Y., p. 61
   22. ^ Clifton E. Olmstead (1960), History of Religion in the United
       States, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., pp. 63-65
   23. ^ Clifton E.Olmstead, History of Religion, pp. 74-75, 99, 104-105,
       114-115
   24. ^ Hans Fantel (1974), William Penn: Apostle of Dissent, William
       Morrow and Co., New York, N.Y.
   25. ^ Edwin S. Gaustad (1999), Liberty of Conscience: Roger Williams in
       America, Judson Press, Valley Forge
   26. ^ "1795–1895. One hundred years of American commerce", Chauncey
       Mitchell Depew. D.O. Haynes, 1895. p. 309.
   27. ^ Marsden, George M. 1990. Religion and American Culture. Orlando:
       Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, pp.45–46.
   28. ^ Jefferson, Thomas (1904). The writings of Thomas Jefferson.
       Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association of the United States.
       p. 119.
   29. ^ "CIA Fact Book". CIA World Fact Book. 2002. Retrieved
       2007-12-30.
   30. ^ "5 USC § 6103 - Holidays | LII / Legal Information Institute".
       .law.cornell.edu. Retrieved 2012-06-03.
   31. ^ "Section 1-3-8".
   32. ^ "Holidays Observed". South Dakota Public Utilities Commission.
       Archived from the original on 14 August 2007.
   33. ^ "State agencies remain open for Discoverers Day". The Honolulu
       Advertiser. 2007-10-08. Retrieved 2012-06-03.
   34. ^ Davis Fred (1992). Fashion, Culture, and Identity
   35. ^ Larson, Carlton F.W. (November 2011). "Naming Baby: The
       Constitutional Dimensions of Naming Rights". George Washington Law
       Review 80 (1).
   36. ^ ^a ^b Wattenberg, Laura (May 7, 2013). The Baby Name Wizard,
       Revised 3rd Edition: A Magical Method for Finding the Perfect Name
       for Your Baby. Harmony. ISBN 0770436471.
   37. ^ Rosenkrantz, Linda (August 29, 2006). Beyond Jennifer & Jason,
       Madison & Montana: What to Name Your Baby Now. Mass Market
       Paperback. ISBN 0312940955.
   38. ^ "Poll: Adults who follow at least one sport". Harris
       Interactive.
   39. ^ Krane, David K. (2002-10-30). "Professional Football Widens Its
       Lead Over Baseball as Nation's Favorite Sport". Harris Interactive.
       Retrieved September 14, 2007.  Maccambridge, Michael (2004).
       America's Game: The Epic Story of How Pro Football Captured a
       Nation. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-375-50454-0.
   40. ^ "Raw Numbers: The NHL’s Impact on the South". The United States
       of Hockey. 2011-05-19. Retrieved 2012-06-05.
   41. ^ "Eight Interesting Facts About Team Sports Participation In
       America".
   42. ^ "Soccer will never be America's sport". USA Today.
   43. ^ "Amid 40th anniversary of Title IX, women set new standard in
       London". CNN. August 12, 2012.
   44. ^ "History of the hot dog". Archived from the original on
       2006-10-18. Retrieved 2006-11-13.
   45. ^ "History of the Hamburger". Retrieved 2006-11-13.
   46. ^ ^a ^b Klapthor, James N. (2003-08-23). "What, When, and Where
       Americans Eat in 2003". Institute of Food Technologists. Retrieved
       2007-06-19.
   47. ^ "Coffee Today". Coffee Country. PBS. May 2003. Retrieved
       2007-06-19.
   48. ^ Smith, Andrew F. (2004). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Food and
       Drink in America. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 131–32.
       ISBN 0-19-515437-1. Levenstein, Harvey (2003). Revolution at the
       Table: The Transformation of the American Diet. Berkeley, Los
       Angeles, and London: University of California Press, pp. 154–55.
       ISBN 0-520-23439-1. Pirovano, Tom (2007). "Health & Wellness
       Trends—The Speculation Is Over". AC Nielsen. Archived from the
       original on 7 August 2007. Retrieved 2007-06-12.
   49. ^ "Fast Food, Central Nervous System Insulin Resistance, and
       Obesity". Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology.
       American Heart Association. 2005. Retrieved 2007-06-09.  "Let's Eat
       Out: Americans Weigh Taste, Convenience, and Nutrition" (PDF). U.S.
       Dept. of Agriculture. Retrieved 2007-06-09.
   50. ^ The CHOW Editorial Team (19 June 2008). "The Hamburger Through
       Time". CBS INTERACTIVE INC. Retrieved 16 April 2012.
   51. ^ Glazed America: Anthropologist Examines Doughnut as Symbol of
       Consumer Culture Newswise, Retrieved on July 22, 2008.
   52. ^ ^a ^b ^c Williams, Brian; Stacey C. Sawyer; Carl M. Wahlstrom
       (2005). Marriages, Families & Intimate Relationships. Boston, MA:
       Pearson. ISBN 0-205-36674-0.
   53. ^ New York apartments pricing and New York NY apartment reviews
       Apartment Ratings
   54. ^ San Francisco apartments pricing and San Francisco CA apartment
       reviews Apartment Ratings
   55. ^ "Honolulu apartments pricing and Honolulu HI apartment reviews".
       Apartmentratings.com. Retrieved 2012-06-03.
   56. ^ Harden, Blaine (2006-06-22). "Washington Post, America is losing
       its middle income neighborhoods". The Washington Post. Retrieved
       2006-07-25.
   57. ^ Harden, Blaine (2006-06-22). "Washington Post, America is losing
       its middle income neighborhoods.". The Washington Post. Retrieved
       2006-07-25.
   58. ^ ^a ^b Highlights of the 2001 National Household Travel Survey,
       Bureau of Transportation Statistics, U.S. Department of
       Transportation, accessed May 21, 2006
   59. ^ "Middle class according to The Drum Major Institute for public
       policy". Retrieved 2006-07-25.
   60. ^ Fussel, Paul (1983). Class: A Guide through the American Status
       System. New York, NY: Touchstone. ISBN 0-671-79225-3.
   61. ^ Fussel, Paul (1983). Class, A Guide through the American status
       system. New York, NY: Touchstone. ISBN 0-671-79225-3.
   62. ^ ^a ^b Ehrenreich, Barbara (1989). Fear of Falling: The Inner Life
       of the Middle Class. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
       ISBN 0-06-097333-1.
   63. ^ ^a ^b "CNN, work in American, UN report finds Americans most
       productive, 2002". 2001-08-31. Retrieved 2006-12-15.
   64. ^ Eichar, Douglas (1989). Occupation and Class Consciousness in
       America. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
       ISBN 0-313-26111-3.
   65. ^ Thompson, William; Joseph Hickey (2005). Society in Focus.
       Boston, MA: Pearson. ISBN 0-205-41365-X.
   66. ^ Eichar, Douglas (1989). Occupation and Class Consciousness in
       America. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
       ISBN 0-313-26111-3.
   67. ^ "Harvard Magazine, Middle class squeeze". Retrieved 2006-12-13.
   68. ^ Ehrenreich, Barbara (1989). Fear of Falling, The Inner Life of
       the Middle Class. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
       ISBN 0-06-097333-1.
   69. ^ "Blacks Are More Socially Conservative Than Barack Obama - Bonnie
       Erbe". usnews.com. 2008-11-07. Retrieved 2012-06-03.
   70. ^ Davis, George (January 6, 2010). "Spiritually Liberal, Socially
       Conservative". Psychology Today.
   71. ^ "U.S. Bureau of Labor, hours worked, 2005". Retrieved
       2006-12-15.
   72. ^ "U.S. Department of Labor, employment in 2006". Retrieved
       2006-12-15.
   73. ^ "International vacation comparison". Retrieved 2006-12-15.
   74. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e Hine, Darlene; William C. Hine; Stanley Harrold
       (2006). The African American Odyssey. Boston, MA: Pearson.
   75. ^ "U.S. Census Bureau, Race and Hispanic or Latino during the 2000
       Census". Retrieved 2006-12-15.
   76. ^ Semiannual Report of the War Relocation Authority, for the period
       January 1 to June 30, 1946, not dated. Papers of Dillon S. Myer.
       Scanned image at trumanlibrary.org. Accessed September 18, 2006.
   77. ^ "Religion in the U.S. by state". USA Today. Retrieved
       2006-12-14.
   78. ^ ^a ^b "U.S. Census Bureau, Income newsbrief 2004". Archived from
       the original on 2006-12-11. Retrieved 2006-12-15.
   79. ^ "U.S. Census Bureau, educational attainment in the U.S. 2003"
       (PDF). Retrieved 2006-12-15.
   80. ^ "U.S. Department of Justice, Crime and Race". Archived from the
       original on 2006-12-12. Retrieved 2006-12-15.
   81. ^ http://www.adc.org/PDF/hcr02.pdf
   82. ^ "The Italian Way of Death". Salon. Archived from the original on
       3 May 2009. Retrieved 2009-10-08.
   83. ^ Bunting, Bainbridge; Robert H. Nylander (1973). Old Cambridge.
       Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge Historical Commission. p. 69.
       ISBN 0-262-53014-7.
   84. ^ Brian K. Williams, Stacy C. Sawyer, Carl M. Wahlstrom, Marriages,
       Families & Intimate Relationships, 2005
   85. ^ ^a ^b "B02001. RACE – Universe: TOTAL POPULATION". 2008 American
       Community Survey 1-Year Estimates. United States Census Bureau.
       Archived from the original on 25 August 2010. Retrieved February
       28, 2010.
   86. ^ ^a ^b "Detailed Tables - American FactFinder; T4-2008. Hispanic
       or Latino By Race [15]". 2008 Population Estimates. U.S. Census
       Bureau. Retrieved 2010-02-28.
   87. ^ "Detailed Tables - American FactFinder; T3-2008. Race [7]". 2008
       Population Estimates. U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 2010-02-28.
   88. ^ Imani Perry, More Beautiful More Terrible: The Embrace and
       Transcendence of Racial Inequality in the United States, New York
       University Press: 2011, p7
   89. ^ Perry, 21
   90. ^ "National Survey of Drug Use and Health". Retrieved 24 November
       2013.
   91. ^ Adams, J.Q.; Pearlie Strother-Adams (2001). Dealing with
       Diversity. Chicago, IL: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company.
       ISBN 0-7872-8145-X.
   92. ^ Crary, David (September 9, 2010). "Study finds Americans in
       generous mood". Burlington, Vermont: Burlington Free Press.
       pp. 1A.
   93. ^ "Federal Government Outlays by Function and Subfunction:
       1962–2015 Fiscal Year 2011 (Table 3.2)". United States Government
       Printing Office. Retrieved 21 December 2010.
   94. ^ "Self-Reported Gun Ownership in U.S. Is Highest Since 1993".
       gallup. October 26, 2011.
   95. ^ "U.S. most armed country with 90 guns per 100 people". Reuters.
       August 28, 2007.
   96. ^ "Gun Ownership by State". Washington Post.
   97. ^ "Personal Safety Top Reason Americans Own Guns Today". gallup.
       October 28, 2013.
   98. ^ "The U.S. gun stock: results from the 2004 national firearms
       survey". Injury Prevention Journal.

Further reading[edit]

     * Coffin, Tristam P.; Cohen, Hennig, (editors), Folklore in America;
       tales, songs, superstitions, proverbs, riddles, games, folk drama
       and folk festivals, Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday, 1966. Selections
       from the Journal of American folklore.
     * Marcus, Greil (2007). The Shape of Things to Come: Prophecy and the
       American Voice. Macmillan. ISBN 0-312-42642-9.
     * Shell, Ellen Ruppel, Cheap: The High Cost of Discount Culture, New
       York: Penguin Press, 2009. ISBN 978-1-59420-215-5
     * Swirski, Peter. Ars Americana Ars Politica: Partisan Expression in
       Contemporary American Literature and Culture. Montreal, London:
       McGill-Queen's University Press (2010) ISBN 978-0-7735-3766-8
     * Crunden, Robert Morse (1996). A Brief History of American Culture.
       M.E. Sharpe. p. 363. ISBN 9781563248658.
     * Jerry Carrier. Tapestry: The History and Culture of America's
       Culture, New York: Algora Publishing, 2014. ISBN 978-1628940480

External links[edit]

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to Culture of the United States.
     * Customs & Culture in the U.S.
     * American Culture Education
     * Life in the USA: The Complete Guide for Immigrants and Americans
     * Guide to American culture and customs for foreign students (U.S.
       Army Intelligence)
     * CommonCensus Map Project – Identifying geographic spheres of
       influence


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Life in the United States
     * Affluence
     * Crime
     * Culture
     * Economic issues
     * Education (attainment)
     * Family structure
     * Health care
     * Health insurance
     * Holidays
     * Income (Household
     * Personal)
     * Income inequality
     * Homelessness
     * Homeownership
     * Human rights
     * Labor unions
     * Languages
     * Middle class
     * Passenger vehicle transport
     * Political ideologies
     * Poverty
     * Race
     * Religion
     * Social class
     * Society
     * Sports
     * Standard of living
     * Wealth


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


                   * v
     * t
     * e

   Culture of the United States
   Culture by city or metropolitan area
                                          * Baltimore
                                          * Boston
                                          * Chicago
                                          * Cincinnati
                                          * Dallas
                                          * Houston
                                          * Los Angeles
                                          * New Orleans
                                          * New York City
                                               + Brooklyn
                                          * Omaha
                                          * Philadelphia
                                          * Pittsburgh
                                          * San Antonio
                                          * San Diego
                                          * San Francisco
                                          * Seattle
                                          * St. Louis
                                          * Virginia Beach

             Culture by state
                                          * Alabama
                                          * Alaska
                                          * Arizona
                                          * Arkansas
                                          * California
                                          * Colorado
                                          * Connecticut
                                          * Delaware
                                          * Florida
                                          * Georgia
                                          * Hawaii
                                          * Idaho
                                          * Illinois
                                          * Indiana
                                          * Iowa
                                          * Kansas
                                          * Kentucky
                                          * Louisiana
                                          * Maine
                                          * Maryland
                                          * Massachusetts
                                          * Michigan
                                          * Minnesota
                                          * Mississippi
                                          * Missouri
                                          * Montana
                                          * Nebraska
                                          * Nevada
                                          * New Hampshire
                                          * New Jersey
                                          * New Mexico
                                          * New York
                                          * North Carolina
                                          * North Dakota
                                          * Ohio
                                          * Oklahoma
                                          * Oregon
                                          * Pennsylvania
                                          * Rhode Island
                                          * South Carolina
                                          * South Dakota
                                          * Tennessee
                                          * Texas
                                          * Utah
                                          * Vermont
                                          * Virginia
                                          * Washington
                                          * West Virginia
                                          * Wisconsin
                                          * Wyoming

            Culture by region
                                          * Mid-Atlantic
                                          * Midwest
                                          * New England
                                          * South

             Federal district
                                          * Washington, D.C.

   Template:Tapestry The History and Consequences of America's Complex
   Culture, Jerry Carrier
   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Culture_of_the_United_States
   &oldid=625331720"
   Categories:
     * American culture
     * American society
     * American studies
     * Arts in the United States
     * Entertainment in the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from May 2012
     * Use mdy dates from September 2011
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011
     * Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013
     * Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections
     * Articles to be expanded from October 2012
     * All articles to be expanded
     * Articles with empty sections from October 2012
     * All articles with empty sections
     * Articles needing additional references from July 2012
     * All articles needing additional references
     * All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases
     * Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from
       January 2012
     * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011
     * Vague or ambiguous time from February 2011
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2012
     * Vague or ambiguous time from October 2012
     * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2013
     * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
     * Articles needing additional references from October 2012
     * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013
     * Commons category template with no category set
     * Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Bosanski
     * Dansk
     * Español
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 한국어
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * ಕನ್ನಡ
     * Македонски
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Português
     * Русский
     * Српски / srpski
     * Suomi
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 13 September 2014 at 04:49.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
