   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Education in the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search

   CAPTION: Education in the United States of America

                       National education budget (2007)
           Budget         $1.3 trillion (public and private, all levels)^[1]
                               General details
     Primary languages    English
        System type       Federal, state, private
                                   Literacy
            Male          99%^[2]
           Female         99%^[2]
                                  Enrollment
           Total          81.5 million
          Primary         37.9 million^1
         Secondary        26.1 million (2006–2007)
       Post secondary     20.5 million ^2
                                  Attainment
     Secondary diploma    85%
   Post-secondary diploma 30%^[3]
   ^1 Includes kindergarten
   ^2 Includes graduate school

   Education in the United States is provided by public schools and
   private schools.

   Public education is universally available, with control and funding
   coming from the state, local, and federal government.^[4] Public school
   curricula, funding, teaching, employment, and other policies are set
   through locally elected school boards, who have jurisdiction over
   individual school districts. State governments set educational
   standards and mandate standardized tests for public school
   systems.^[clarification needed]

   Private schools are generally free to determine their own curriculum
   and staffing policies, with voluntary accreditation available through
   independent regional accreditation authorities. 88% of school-age
   children attend public schools, 9% attend private schools, and nearly
   3% are homeschooled.^[5]

   Education is compulsory over an age range starting between five and
   eight and ending somewhere between ages sixteen and eighteen, depending
   on the state.^[6] This requirement can be satisfied in public schools,
   state-certified private schools, or an approved home school program. In
   most schools, education is divided into three levels: elementary
   school, middle or junior high school, and high school. Children are
   usually divided by age groups into grades, ranging from kindergarten
   and first grade for the youngest children, up to twelfth grade as the
   final year of high school.

   There are also a large number and wide variety of publicly and
   privately administered institutions of higher education throughout the
   country. Post-secondary education, divided into college, as the first
   tertiary degree, and graduate school, is described in a separate
   section below.

Contents

     * 1 History
     * 2 Statistics
     * 3 Educational stages
     * 4 K-12 education
          + 4.1 Preschool (Pre-K)
          + 4.2 Primary education
          + 4.3 Secondary education
          + 4.4 Grading scale
          + 4.5 Standardized testing
          + 4.6 Extracurricular activities
          + 4.7 Home schooling
          + 4.8 Education of students with special needs
          + 4.9 Public and private schools
          + 4.10 Funding for K–12 schools
          + 4.11 Test performance for primary and secondary schools
     * 5 Higher education
          + 5.1 Cost
          + 5.2 The status ladder
          + 5.3 Criticism
          + 5.4 Funding for college
     * 6 Issues
          + 6.1 Affirmative action
          + 6.2 Attainment
               o 6.2.1 Student quality and college dropout rate
               o 6.2.2 Gender differences
               o 6.2.3 Racial achievement differences
               o 6.2.4 International comparison
               o 6.2.5 Wider economic impact
          + 6.3 Behavior
               o 6.3.1 Race
               o 6.3.2 School security
               o 6.3.3 Cheating
          + 6.4 Curriculum
               o 6.4.1 English in the classroom
               o 6.4.2 Evolution in Kansas
               o 6.4.3 Sex education
               o 6.4.4 Textbook review and adoption
          + 6.5 Governance
          + 6.6 Tracking (streaming)
          + 6.7 Charter schools
     * 7 Reading and writing habits
     * 8 See also
     * 9 References
     * 10 Further reading
          + 10.1 Bibliography
          + 10.2 History
     * 11 External links

History[edit]

   Main article: History of education in the United States

   Government-supported and free public schools for all began to be
   established after the American Revolution. Between 1750 and 1870
   parochial schools appeared as "ad hoc" efforts by parishes.
   Historically, many parochials elementary schools were developed which
   were open to all children in the parish, mainly Catholic, but also
   Lutherans, Calvinists and Orthodox Jews. Nonsectarian Common schools,
   designed by Horace Mann were opened, which taught the three Rs (of
   reading, writing, and arithmetic) and also history and geography.

   In 1823, Reverend Samuel Read Hall founded the first normal school, the
   Columbian School in Concord, Vermont,^[7]^[8] to improve the quality of
   the burgeoning common school system by producing more qualified
   teachers.

   States passed laws to make schooling compulsory between 1852
   (Massachusetts) and 1917 (Mississippi). They also used federal funding
   designated by the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Acts of 1862 and 1890 to
   set up land grant colleges specializing in agriculture and engineering.
   By 1870, every state had free elementary schools,^[9] albeit only in
   urban centers.

   Starting from about 1876, thirty-nine states (out of 50) passed a
   constitutional amendment to their state constitutions, called Blaine
   Amendments after James G. Blaine, one of their chief promoters,
   forbidding public tax money be used to fund local parochial schools.

   Following the American Civil War, the Tuskegee Normal and Industrial
   Institute was founded in 1881, in Tuskegee, Alabama to train "Colored
   Teachers", led by Booker T. Washington, (1856-1915), who was himself a
   freed slave. His movement spread to many other Southern states to
   establish small colleges for "Colored or Negro" students then (now
   "Black") entitled "A. & M.", ("Agricultural and Mechanical") or "A. &
   T.", ("Agricultural and Technical"), some of which later developed into
   state universities.

   Responding to many competing academic philosophies being promoted at
   the time, an influential working group of educators, known as the
   Committee of Ten was established in 1892, by the National Education
   Association recommended that children should receive twelve years of
   instruction, consisting of eight years of elementary education (also
   known as "grammar schools") followed by four years in high school
   ("freshmen", "sophomores", "juniors" and "seniors").

   Gradually by the late 1890s, regional associations of high schools,
   colleges and universities were being organized to coordinate proper
   accrediting standards, examinations and regular surveys of various
   institutions to assure equal treatment in graduation and admissions
   requirements, course completion and transfer procedures.

   By 1910, 72 percent of children attended school. Private schools spread
   during this time, as well as colleges and — in the rural centers — land
   grant colleges also. Between 1910 and 1940 the high school movement
   resulted in rapidly increasing public high school enrollment and
   graduations. By 1930, 100 percent of children attended school.

   During World War II, enrollment in high schools and colleges plunged as
   many high school and college students dropped out to take war
   jobs.^[10]^[11]^[12]

   The 1946 National School Lunch Act, which is still in operation,
   provided low-cost or free school lunch meals to qualified low-income
   students through subsidies to schools, providing the idea of a "full
   stomach" during the day supported class attention and studying. The
   1954 Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas
   made racial desegregation of public elementary and high schools
   mandatory, although private schools expanded in response to accommodate
   white families attempting to avoid desegregation by sending their
   children to private secular or religious schools. ^[13] ^[14] ^[15]

   In 1965, the far-reaching Elementary and Secondary Education Act
   ('ESEA'), passed as a part of President Lyndon B. Johnson's War on
   Poverty, provided funds for primary and secondary education ('Title I
   funding') while explicitly forbidding the establishment of a national
   curriculum.^[16] Section IV of the Act created the Pell Grant program
   which provides financial support to students from low-income families
   to access higher education.

   In 1975, the Education for All Handicapped Children Act established
   funding for special education in schools.

   Policy changes have also sometimes slowed equal access to higher
   education for poorer people. Cuts to the Pell Grant scholarship aid
   programs in 2012 reduced the number of low-income students who would
   receive grants. ^[17]

   The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 made standardized
   testing a requirement. The Higher Education Amendments of 1972 made
   changes to the Pell Grants. The 1975 Education for All Handicapped
   Children Act required all public schools accepting federal funds to
   provide equal access to education and one free meal a day for children
   with physical and mental disabilities. The 1983 National Commission on
   Excellence in Education report, famously titled A Nation at Risk,
   touched off a wave of local, state, and federal reform efforts.

   The 2002 No Child Left Behind, passed by a bipartisan coalition in
   Congress provided federal aid to the states in exchange for measures to
   penalize schools that were not meeting the goals as measured by
   standardized state exams in mathematics and language
   skills.^[18]^[19]^[20] In the same year, the U.S. Supreme Court diluted
   some of the century-old "Blaine" laws upheld an Ohio law allowing aid
   to parochial schools under specific circumstances.^[21] The 2006
   Commission on the Future of Higher Education evaluated higher
   education.

Statistics[edit]

   In 2000, 76.6 million students had enrolled in schools from
   kindergarten through graduate schools. Of these, 72 percent aged 12 to
   17 were considered academically "on track" for their age, i.e. enrolled
   in at or above grade level. Of those enrolled elementary and secondary
   schools, 5.2 million (10.4 percent) attended private schools.^[citation
   needed]

   Over 85 percent of the adult population have completed high school and
   27 percent have received a bachelor's degree or higher. The average
   salary for college or university graduates is greater than $51,000,
   exceeding the national average of those without a high school diploma
   by more than $23,000, according to a 2005 study by the U.S. Census
   Bureau. ^[22] The 2010 unemployment rate for high school graduates was
   10.8%; the rate for college graduates was 4.9%. ^[23]

   The country has a reading literacy rate of 99% of the population over
   age 15,^[24] while ranking below average in science and mathematics
   understanding compared to other developed countries.^[25] In 2008,
   there was a 77% graduation rate from high school, below that of most
   developed countries.^[26]

   The poor performance has pushed public and private efforts such as the
   No Child Left Behind Act. In addition, the ratio of college-educated
   adults entering the workforce to general population (33%) is slightly
   below the mean of other developed countries (35%)^[27] and rate of
   participation of the labor force in continuing education is high.^[28]
   A 2000s (decade) study by Jon Miller of Michigan State University
   concluded that "A slightly higher proportion of American adults qualify
   as scientifically literate than European or Japanese adults".^[29]

   According to the National Association of School Nurses, 17% of students
   are considered obese and 32% are overweight.^[30]

   The American school year traditionally begins at the end of August or
   the day after Labor Day in September, after a traditional summer
   recess. Children customarily advance together from one grade to the
   next as a single class or "cohort" upon reaching the end of each school
   year in late May or early June.

Educational stages[edit]

   Formal education in the U.S. is divided into a number of distinct
   educational stages. Most children enter the public education system
   around ages five or six. They may begin in pre-kindergarten,
   kindergarten or first grade. They normally attend 12 grades of study
   over 12 calendar years of primary/elementary and secondary education
   before graduating, earning a diploma that makes them eligible for
   admission to higher education.^[31] Education is only mandatory until
   age 16, however. There are generally five years of primary (elementary)
   school, during which students customarily advance together from one
   grade to the next as a single cohort or "class", three years of middle
   school, which may have cohorts, and four years of high school. There is
   some variability in the arrangement of grades.^[31]

   In the U.S., ordinal numbers (e.g., first grade) are used for
   identifying grades. Typical ages and grade groupings in contemporary,
   public and private schools may be found through the U.S. Department of
   Education. Generally there are elementary school (K-5th grade), middle
   school (6th-8th grades) and high school (9th-12th grades).^[32] Many
   different variations exist across the country.
   Diagram of education in the United States
   General level (or category) Level Student age range
   Preschool Pre-kindergarten 2–4
   Compulsory education
   Elementary
   school Kindergarten 5–6
   First grade 6–7
   Second grade 7–8
   Third grade 8–9
   Fourth grade 9–10
   Fifth grade 10–11
   Middle
   school Sixth grade 11–12
   Junior high
   school Seventh grade 12–13
   Eighth grade 13-14
   High
   school Freshman/9th Grade 14-15
   Senior high
   school Sophomore/10th Grade 15-16
   Junior/11th Grade 16-17
   Senior/12th Grade 17-18
   Higher education
   College
   (University) Undergraduate
   school Freshman year Ages vary, but often 18–22
   for a consecutive bachelor's degree
   (usually within a solitary concentration)
   Sophomore year
   Junior year
   Senior year
   Graduate school
   (with various degrees and curricular partitions thereof) Ages vary
   Continuing education
   Vocational school Ages vary
   Adult education

   Students completing high school may choose to attend a college or
   university, which offer undergraduate degrees such as Associate's
   degrees or Bachelor's degrees (baccalaureate).

   Community college or junior college typically offer two-year
   associate's degrees, although some community colleges offer a limited
   number of bachelor's degrees. Some community college students choose to
   transfer to a four-year institution to pursue a Bachelor's degree.
   Community colleges are generally publicly funded (usually by local
   cities or counties)and offer career certifications and part-time
   programs.

   Four-year institutions may be public or private colleges or
   universities.

   Some counties and cities have established and fund four-year
   institutions; examples include the City University of New York, City
   Colleges of Chicago, and San Francisco City College.

   Private institutions are privately funded and there is a wide variety
   in size, focus, and operation. Some private institutions are large
   research universities, while others are small liberal arts colleges
   that concentrate on undergraduate education. Some private universities
   are nonsectarian and secular, while others are religiously-affiliated.
   While most private institutions are non-profit, a growing number in the
   past decade have been established For-profit education.

   Curriculum varies widely depending on the institution. Typically, an
   undergraduate student will be able to select an academic "major" or
   concentration, which comprises the main or special subjects, and
   students may change their major one or more times.

   Some students, typically those with a bachelor's degree, may choose to
   continue on to graduate or professional school. Graduate degrees may be
   either master's degrees (e.g., M.A., M.S., M.B.A., M.S.W.) or a
   doctorates (e.g., Ph.D., J.D., ("Doctor of Law"), M.D., D.O.).
   Academia-focused graduate school typically includes some combination of
   coursework and research (often requiring a thesis or dissertation to be
   written), while professional graduate-level schools (e.g., medical,
   law, business) grants a first professional degree and aims to prepare
   students to enter a learned profession of a medical doctor, attorney at
   law (lawyer), advanced Business/Economics. Other graduate-level schools
   attached to many Universities train for a Pharmacist, dentist,
   veterinarian, or minister/priest. Normally it's 4 years
   college/university. Community and special colleges may offer 2 year
   degrees so that would be any range from age 18 to 20 (normally).

K-12 education[edit]

   Schooling is compulsory for all children in the United States, but the
   age range for which school attendance is required varies from state to
   state. Some states allow students to leave school between 14–17 with
   parental permission, before finishing high school; other states require
   students to stay in school until age 18.^[33] Compulsory education is
   typically from kindergarten to grade 12 and is thus referred to as K-12
   (short for K through twelve).

   Most parents send their children to either a public or private
   institution. According to government data, one-tenth of students are
   enrolled in private schools. Approximately 85% of students enter the
   public schools,^[34] largely because they are tax-subsidized (tax
   burdens by school districts vary from area to area). School districts
   are usually separate from other local jurisdictions, with independent
   officials and budgets.

   There are more than 14,000 school districts in the country,^[35] and
   more than $500 billion is spent each year on public primary and
   secondary education.^[35] Most states require that their school
   districts within the state teach for 180 days a year.^[36] In 2010,
   there were 3,823,142 teachers in public, charter, private, and Catholic
   elementary and secondary schools. They taught a total of 55,203,000
   students, who attended one of 132,656 schools.^[37]

   Most children begin elementary education with kindergarten (usually
   five to six years old) and finish secondary education with twelfth
   grade (usually eighteen years old). In some cases, pupils may be
   promoted beyond the next regular grade. Parents may also choose to
   educate their own children at home; 1.7% of children are educated in
   this manner.^[34]^[clarification needed]

   Around 3 million students between the ages of 16 and 24 drop out of
   high school each year, a rate of 6.6 percent as of
   2012^[update].^[citation needed] In the United States, 75 percent of
   crimes are committed by high school dropouts. Around 60 percent of
   black dropouts end up spending time incarcerated.^[38] The
   incarceration rate for African-American male high school dropouts was
   about 50 times the national average as of 2010^[update].^[39]

   States do not require reporting from their school districts to allow
   analysis of efficiency of return on investment. The Center for American
   Progress commends Florida and Texas as the only two states that provide
   annual school-level productivity evaluations which report to the public
   how well school funds are being spent at the local level. This allows
   for comparison of school districts within a state.^[40]^[41] In 2010,
   American students rank 17th in the world. The Organisation for Economic
   Co-operation and Development says that this is due to focusing on the
   low end of performers. All of the recent gains have been made,
   deliberately, at the low end of the socioeconomic scale and among the
   lowest achievers. The country has been outrun, the study says, by other
   nations because the US has not done enough to encourage the highest
   achievers.^[42]

   About half of the states encourage schools to recite the Pledge of
   Allegiance to the flag.^[43]

   Teachers worked from about 35 to 46 hours a week, in a survey taken in
   1993.^[44] In 2011, American teachers worked 1,097 hours in the
   classroom, the most for any industrialized nation measured by the
   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. They spend
   1,913 hours a year on their work, just below the national average of
   1,932 hours for all workers.^[45] In 2011, the average annual salary of
   a preK-12 teacher was $55,040.^[46]

   Transporting students to and from school is a major concern for most
   school districts. School buses provide the largest mass transit program
   in the country, 8.8 billion trips per year. Non-school transit buses
   give 5.2 billion trips annually. 440,000 yellow school buses carry over
   24 million students to and from schools.^[47] In 1971, the Supreme
   Court ruled unanimously that forced busing of students may be ordered
   to achieve racial desegregation.^[48] This ruling resulted in a white
   flight from the inner cities which largely diluted the intent of the
   order. This flight had other, non-educational ramifications as well.
   Integration took place in most schools though de facto segregation
   often determined the composition of the student body. By the 1990s,
   most areas of the country have been released from mandatory busing.

   School start times are computed with busing in mind. There are often
   three start times: for elementary, for middle/junior high school, and
   for high school. One school district computed its cost per bus (without
   the driver) at $20,575 annually. It assumed a model where the average
   driver drove 80 miles per day. A driver was presumed to cost $.62 per
   mile (1.6 km). Elementary schools started at 7:30, middle
   schools/junior high school started at 8:30, and high schools at 8:15.
   While elementary school started earlier, they also finish earlier, at
   2:30, middle schools at 3:30 and high schools at 3:20.^[49] All school
   districts establish their own times and means of transportation within
   guidelines set by their own state.

Preschool (Pre-K)[edit]

   Main article: Pre-kindergarten

   Pre-kindergarten (also called Pre-K or PK) is a classroom-based early
   childhood education program for children below the age of six in the
   United States, either delivered through a preschool or as a reception
   year in Elementary school. Head Start Program, the federally funded
   pre-kindergarten program founded in 1965 prepares children (especially
   those of a disadvantaged population) to better succeed in school.

Primary education[edit]

   Main article: Primary education in the United States
   A teacher and her students in an elementary school classroom

   Historically, in the United States, local public control (and private
   alternatives) have allowed for some variation in the organization of
   schools. Elementary school includes kindergarten through fifth grade
   (or sometimes, to fourth grade, sixth grade or eighth grade). Basic
   subjects are taught in elementary school, and students often remain in
   one classroom throughout the school day, except for physical education,
   library, music, and art classes. There are (as of 2001) about 3.6
   million children in each grade in the United States.^[50]

   Typically, the curriculum in public elementary education is determined
   by individual school districts. The school district selects curriculum
   guides and textbooks that reflect a state's learning standards and
   benchmarks for a given grade level.^[51] Learning Standards are the
   goals by which states and school districts must meet adequate yearly
   progress (AYP) as mandated by No Child Left Behind (NCLB). This
   description of school governance is simplistic at best, however, and
   school systems vary widely not only in the way curricular decisions are
   made but also in how teaching and learning take place. Some states
   and/or school districts impose more top-down mandates than others. In
   others, teachers play a significant role in curriculum design and there
   are few top-down mandates. Curricular decisions within private schools
   are often made differently from in public schools, and in most cases
   without consideration of NCLB.

   Public Elementary School teachers typically instruct between twenty and
   thirty students of diverse learning needs. A typical classroom will
   include children with a range of learning needs or abilities, from
   those identified as having special needs of the kinds listed in the
   Individuals with Disabilities Act IDEA to those that are cognitively,
   athletically or artistically gifted. At times, an individual school
   district identifies areas of need within the curriculum. Teachers and
   advisory administrators form committees to develop supplemental
   materials to support learning for diverse learners and to identify
   enrichment for textbooks. Many school districts post information about
   the curriculum and supplemental materials on websites for public
   access.^[52]

   In general, a student learns basic arithmetic and sometimes rudimentary
   algebra in mathematics, English proficiency (such as basic grammar,
   spelling, and vocabulary), and fundamentals of other subjects. Learning
   standards are identified for all areas of a curriculum by individual
   States, including those for mathematics, social studies, science,
   physical development, the fine arts, and reading.^[51] While the
   concept of State Learning standards has been around for some time, No
   Child Left Behind has mandated that standards exist at the State level.

Secondary education[edit]

   A high-school senior (twelfth grade) classroom in Calhan, Colorado
   Main article: Secondary education in the United States

   Secondary education is often divided into two phases, middle or junior
   high school and high school. Students are usually given more
   independence, moving to different classrooms for different subjects,
   and being allowed to choose some of their class subjects (electives).

   "Middle school" usually includes sixth, seventh and eighth grade (and
   occasionally fifth grade as well); "Junior high" may include any range
   from sixth through ninth grades. The range defined by either is often
   based on demographic factors, such as an increase or decrease in the
   relative numbers of younger or older students, with the aim of
   maintaining stable school populations.

   High school (occasionally senior high school) usually runs from 9th or
   10th through 12th grades. Students in these grades are commonly
   referred to as freshmen (grade 9), sophomores (grade 10), juniors
   (grade 11) and seniors (grade 12). Generally, at the high school level,
   students take a broad variety of classes without special emphasis in
   any particular subject. Students are required to take a certain
   mandatory subjects, but may choose additional subjects ("electives") to
   fill out their required hours of learning. High school grades normally
   are included in a student's official transcript, e.g. for college
   admission.

   Each state sets minimum requirements for how many years of various
   mandatory subjects are required; these requirements vary widely, but
   generally include 2–4 years of each of: Science, Mathematics, English,
   Social sciences, Physical education; some years of a foreign language
   and some form of art education are often also required, as is a health
   curriculum in which students learn about anatomy, nutrition, first aid,
   sexuality, drug awareness, and birth control. In many cases, however,
   options are provided for students to "test out" of this requirement or
   complete independent study to meet it.

   Many high schools provide Advanced Placement (AP) or International
   Baccalaureate (IB) courses. These are special forms of honors classes
   where the curriculum is more challenging and lessons more aggressively
   paced than standard courses. AP or IB courses are usually taken during
   the 11th or 12th grade of high school, but may be taken as early as 9th
   grade.

Grading scale[edit]

   In schools in the United States children are constantly assessed
   throughout the school year by their teachers, and report cards are
   issued to parents at varying intervals. Generally the scores for
   individual assignments and tests are recorded for each student in a
   grade book, along with the maximum number of points for each
   assignment. At any time, the total number of points for a student when
   divided by the total number of possible points produces a percent
   grade, which can be translated to a letter grade.

   Letter grades are often but not always used on report cards at the end
   of a marking period, although the current grade may be available at
   other times (particularly when an electronic grade book connected to an
   online service is in use). Although grading scales usually differ from
   school to school, the most common grade scale is letter grades—"A"
   through "F"—derived from a scale of 0–100 or a percentile. In some
   areas, Texas or Virginia for example, the "D" grade (or that between
   70–60) is considered a failing grade. In other states, such as Hawaii,
   a "D" grade is considered passing in certain classes, and failing in
   others.^[citation needed]

   CAPTION: Example Grading Scale

   A B C D F or E
   + – + – + – + –
   100–97 96–93 92–90 89–87 86–83 82–80 79–77 76–73 72–70 69–67 66–63
   62–60 Below 60 Percent

Standardized testing[edit]

   See also: Test (student assessment)

   Under the No Child Left Behind Act, all American states must test
   students in public schools statewide to ensure that they are achieving
   the desired level of minimum education,^[53] such as on the New York
   Regents Examinations, the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT),
   or the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS); students
   being educated at home or in private schools are not included. The act
   also requires that students and schools show adequate yearly progress.
   This means they must show some improvement each year. When a student
   fails to make adequate yearly progress, No Child Left Behind mandates
   that remediation through summer school and/or tutoring be made
   available to a student in need of extra help.

   Academic performance impacts the perception of a school's educational
   program. Rural schools fare better than their urban counterparts in two
   key areas: test scores and drop-out rate. First, students in small
   schools performed equal to or better than their larger school
   counterparts.^[54] In addition, on the 2005 National Assessment of
   Education Progress, 4th and 8th grade students scored as well or better
   in reading, science, and mathematics.^[55]

   During high school, students (usually in 11th grade) may take one or
   more standardized tests depending on their post-secondary education
   preferences and their local graduation requirements. In theory, these
   tests evaluate the overall level of knowledge and learning aptitude of
   the students. The SAT and ACT are the most common standardized tests
   that students take when applying to college. A student may take the
   SAT, ACT, or both depending upon the post-secondary institutions the
   student plans to apply to for admission. Most competitive schools also
   require two or three SAT Subject Tests (formerly known as SAT IIs),
   which are shorter exams that focus strictly on a particular subject
   matter. However, all these tests serve little to no purpose for
   students who do not move on to post-secondary education, so they can
   usually be skipped without affecting one's ability to graduate.

   Standardized testing has become increasingly controversial in recent
   years. Creativity and the need for applicable knowledge are becoming
   rapidly more valuable than simple memorization. Opponents of
   standardized education^[56] have stated that it is the system of
   standardized education itself^[57] that is to blame for employment
   issues and concerns over the questionable abilities of recent
   graduates.^[58]^[59]^[60]^[61]

Extracurricular activities[edit]

   Question book-new.svg
   This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help
   improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011)

   A major characteristic of American schools is the high priority given
   to sports, clubs and activities by the community, the parents, the
   schools and the students themselves. Extracurricular activities are
   educational activities not falling within the scope of the regular
   curriculum but under the supervision of the school. These activities
   can extend to large amounts of time outside the normal school day;
   home-schooled students, however, are not normally allowed to
   participate. Student participation in sports programs, drill teams,
   bands, and spirit groups can amount to hours of practices and
   performances. Most states have organizations that develop rules for
   competition between groups. These organizations are usually forced to
   implement time limits on hours practiced as a prerequisite for
   participation. Many schools also have non-varsity sports teams;
   however, these are usually afforded less resources and attention.

   Sports programs and their related games, especially football and/or
   basketball, are major events for American students and for larger
   schools can be a major source of funds for school districts.

   High school athletic competitions often generate intense interest in
   the community.

   In addition to sports, numerous non-athletic extracurricular activities
   are available in American schools, both public and private. Activities
   include Quizbowl, musical groups, marching bands, student government,
   school newspapers, science fairs, debate teams, and clubs focused on an
   academic area (such as the Spanish Club) or community service interests
   (such as Key Club).^[citation needed]

Home schooling[edit]

   Main article: Homeschooling in the United States

   In 2014, approximately 1.5 million children were homeschooled, up 84%
   from 1999 when the U.S. Department of Education first started keeping
   statistics. This was 2.9% of all children.^[62]

   Many select moral or religious reasons for homeschooling their
   children. The second main category is unschooling, those who prefer a
   non-standard approach to education.^[62]

   Most homeschooling advocates are wary of the established educational
   institutions for various reasons. Some are religious conservatives who
   see nonreligious education as contrary to their moral or religious
   systems, or who wish to add religious instruction to the educational
   curriculum (and who may be unable to afford a church-operated private
   school or where the only available school may teach views contrary to
   those of the parents). Others feel that they can more effectively
   tailor a curriculum to suit an individual student's academic strengths
   and weaknesses, especially those with singular needs or disabilities.
   Still others feel that the negative social pressures of schools (such
   as bullying, drugs, crime, sex, and other school-related problems) are
   detrimental to a child's proper development. Parents often form groups
   to help each other in the homeschooling process, and may even assign
   classes to different parents, similar to public and private schools.

   Opposition to homeschooling comes from varied sources, including
   teachers' organizations and school districts. The National Education
   Association, the largest labor union in the United States, has been
   particularly vocal in the past.^[63] Opponents' stated concerns fall
   into several broad categories, including fears of poor academic
   quality, and lack of socialization with others. At this time, over half
   of states have oversight into monitoring or measuring the academic
   progress of home schooled students, with all but ten requiring some
   form of notification to the state.^[64]

Education of students with special needs[edit]

   Main article: Special education in the United States

   Commonly known as special classes, are taught by teachers with training
   in adapting curricula to meet the needs of students with special needs.

   According to the National Association of School Nurses, 5% of students
   in 2009 have a seizure disorder,^[65] another 5% have ADHD and 10% have
   mental or emotional problems.^[30]

   On January 25, 2013, the Office for Civil Rights of the US Department
   of Education issued guidance, clarifying school districts' existing
   legal obligations to give disabled students an equal chance to compete
   in extracurricular sports alongside their able-bodied classmates.^[66]

   Educating children with disabilities

   The federal law, Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
   requires states to ensure that all government-run schools provide
   services to meet the individual needs of students with special needs,
   as defined by the law.^[67] All students with special needs are
   entitled to a free and appropriate public education (FAPE).

   Schools meet with the parents or guardians to develop an Individualized
   Education Program that determines best placement for the child.
   Students must be placed in the least restrictive environment (LRE) that
   is appropriate for the student's needs. Public schools that fail to
   provide an appropriate placement for students with special needs can be
   taken to due process wherein parents may formally submit their
   grievances and demand appropriate services for the child.^[citation
   needed]

   Criticism

   At-risk students (those with educational needs that aren't associated
   with a disability) are often placed in classes with students with minor
   emotional and social disabilities.^[68] Critics assert that placing
   at-risk students in the same classes as these disabled students may
   impede the educational progress of both the at-risk and the disabled
   students.^[citation needed] Some research has refuted this claim, and
   has suggested this approach increases the academic and behavioral
   skills of the entire student population.^[69]
   See also: Special education

Public and private schools[edit]

   In the United States, state and local government have primary
   responsibility for education. The Federal Department of Education plays
   a role in standards setting and education finance, and some primary and
   secondary schools, for the children of military employees, are run by
   the Department of Defense.^[70]

   K-12 students in most areas have a choice between free tax-funded
   public schools, or privately funded private schools.

   Public school systems are supported by a combination of local, state,
   and federal government funding. Because a large portion of school
   revenues come from local property taxes, public schools vary widely in
   the resources they have available per student. Class size also varies
   from one district to another. Curriculum decisions in public schools
   are made largely at the local and state levels; the federal government
   has limited influence. In most districts, a locally elected school
   board runs schools. The school board appoints an official called the
   superintendent of schools to manage the schools in the district.

   The largest public school system in the United States is in New York
   City, where more than one million students are taught in 1,200 separate
   public schools. Because of its immense size – there are more students
   in the system than residents in the eight smallest US states – the New
   York City public school system is nationally influential in determining
   standards and materials, such as textbooks.^[citation needed]

   Admission to individual public schools is usually based on residency.
   To compensate for differences in school quality based on geography,
   school systems serving large cities and portions of large cities often
   have magnet schools that provide enrollment to a specified number of
   non-resident students in addition to serving all resident students.
   This special enrollment is usually decided by lottery with equal
   numbers of males and females chosen. Some magnet schools cater to
   gifted students or to students with special interests, such as the
   sciences or performing arts.^[71]

   Private schools in the United States include parochial schools
   (affiliated with religious denominations),^[72] non-profit independent
   schools, and for-profit private schools. Private schools charge varying
   rates depending on geographic location, the school's expenses, and the
   availability of funding from sources, other than tuition. For example,
   some churches partially subsidize private schools for their members.
   Some people have argued that when their child attends a private school,
   they should be able to take the funds that the public school no longer
   needs and apply that money towards private school tuition in the form
   of vouchers. This is the basis of the school choice movement.^[citation
   needed]

   5,072,451 students attended 33,740 private elementary and secondary
   schools in 2007. 74.5% of these were Caucasian, non-Hispanic, 9.8% were
   African American, 9.6% were Hispanic. 5.4% were Asian or Pacific
   Islander, and .6% were American Indian. Average school size was 150.3
   students. There were 456,266 teachers. The number of students per
   teacher was about 11. 65% of seniors in private schools in 2006-7 went
   on to attend a 4-year college.^[73]

   Private schools have various missions: some cater to college-bound
   students seeking a competitive edge in the college admissions process;
   others are for gifted students, students with learning disabilities or
   other special needs, or students with specific religious affiliations.
   Some cater to families seeking a small school, with a nurturing,
   supportive environment. Unlike public school systems, private schools
   have no legal obligation to accept any interested student. Admission to
   some private schools is often highly selective. Private schools also
   have the ability to permanently expel persistently unruly students, a
   disciplinary option not legally available to public school systems.

   Private schools offer the advantages of smaller classes, under twenty
   students in a typical elementary classroom, for example; a higher
   teacher/student ratio across the school day, greater individualized
   attention and in the more competitive schools, expert college placement
   services. Unless specifically designed to do so, private schools
   usually cannot offer the services required by students with serious or
   multiple learning, emotional, or behavioral issues. Although reputed to
   pay lower salaries than public school systems, private schools often
   attract teachers by offering high-quality professional development
   opportunities, including tuition grants for advanced degrees. According
   to elite private schools themselves, this investment in faculty
   development helps maintain the high quality program that they
   offer.^[citation needed]

   An August 17, 2000 article by the Chicago Sun-Times refers to the Roman
   Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago Office of Catholic Schools as the
   largest private school system in the United States.^[74]

Funding for K–12 schools[edit]

   According to a 2005 report from the OECD, the United States is tied for
   first place with Switzerland when it comes to annual spending per
   student on its public schools, with each of those two countries
   spending more than $11,000.^[75] However, the United States is ranked
   37th in the world in education spending as a percentage of gross
   domestic product. All but seven of the leading countries are in
   developing countries; ranked high because of a low GDP.^[76]

   The federal government contributes money to certain individual school
   districts as part of Federal Impact Aid. The original idea was that the
   federal government paid no local real estate taxes on their property to
   support local schools. Children of government employees might move in
   and impact an area which required expenditure for education at the
   local level. This aid was a way of equalizing the unexpected
   impact.^[citation needed]

   According to a 2006 study by the conservative Goldwater Institute,
   Arizona's public schools spend 50% more per student than Arizona's
   private schools. The study also says that while teachers constitute 72%
   of the employees at private schools, they make up less than half of the
   staff at public schools.^[77]

   According to a 1999 article by William J. Bennett, former U.S.
   Secretary of Education, increased levels of spending on public
   education have not made the schools better. Among many other things,
   the article cites the following statistics:^[78]
     * Between 1960 and 1995, U.S. public school spending per student,
       adjusted for inflation, increased by 212%.
     * In 1994, less than half of all U.S. public school employees were
       teachers.

   ^[clarification needed] Funding for schools in the United States is
   complex. One current controversy stems much from the No Child Left
   Behind Act. The Act gives the Department of Education the right to
   withhold funding if it believes a school, district, or even a state is
   not complying with federal plans and is making no effort to comply.
   However, federal funding accounts for little of the overall funding
   schools receive. The vast majority comes from the state government and
   in some cases from local property taxes.^[citation needed]

   Property taxes as a primary source of funding for public education have
   become highly controversial, for a number of reasons. First, if a
   state's population and land values escalate rapidly, many longtime
   residents may find themselves paying property taxes much higher than
   anticipated. In response to this phenomenon, California's citizens
   passed Proposition 13 in 1978, which severely restricted the ability of
   the Legislature to expand the state's educational system to keep up
   with growth. Some states, such as Michigan, have investigated or
   implemented alternate schemes for funding education that may sidestep
   the problems of funding based mainly on property taxes by providing
   funding based on sales or income tax. These schemes also have failings,
   negatively impacting funding in a slow economy.^[79]

   One of the biggest debates in funding public schools is funding by
   local taxes or state taxes. The federal government supplies around 8.5%
   of the public school system funds, according to a 2005 report by the
   National Center for Education Statistics."Revenues and Expenditures for
   Public Elementary and Secondary Education, Table 1". National Center
   for Education Statistics. Retrieved 2014-06-04.  The remaining split
   between state and local governments averages 48.7 percent from states
   and 42.8 percent from local sources.^[80]

   Rural schools struggle with funding concerns. State funding sources
   often favor wealthier districts. The state establishes a minimum flat
   amount deemed "adequate" to educate a child based on equalized assessed
   value of property taxes. This favors wealthier districts with a much
   larger tax base. This, combined with the history of slow payment in the
   state, leaves rural districts searching for funds. Lack of funding
   leads to limited resources for teachers. Resources that directly relate
   to funding include access to high-speed internet, online learning
   programs and advanced course offerings.^[55] These resources can
   enhance a student's learning opportunities, but may not be available to
   everyone if a district cannot afford to offer specific programs. One
   study found that school districts spend less efficiently in areas in
   which they face little or no competition from other public schools, in
   large districts, and in areas in which residents are poor or less
   educated.^[81]

   Judicial intervention

   The reliance on local funding sources has led to a long history of
   court challenges about how states fund their schools. These challenges
   have relied on interpretations of state constitutions after a U.S.
   Supreme Court ruling that school funding was not a matter of the U.S.
   Constitution (San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411
   U.S. 1 (1973)). The state court cases, beginning with the California
   case of Serrano v. Priest, 5 Cal.3d 584 (1971), were initially
   concerned with equity in funding, which was defined in terms of
   variations in spending across local school districts. More recently,
   state court cases have begun to consider what has been called
   'adequacy.' These cases have questioned whether the total amount of
   spending was sufficient to meet state constitutional requirements.
   Perhaps the most famous adequacy case is Abbott v. Burke, 100 N.J. 269,
   495 A.2d 376 (1985), which has involved state court supervision over
   several decades and has led to some of the highest spending of any U.S.
   districts in the so-called Abbott districts. The background and results
   of these cases are analyzed in a book by Eric Hanushek and Alfred
   Lindseth.^[82] That analysis concludes that funding differences are not
   closely related to student outcomes and thus that the outcomes of the
   court cases have not led to improved policies.

   In McCleary v. Washington State (2012), Supreme Court decision that
   found the state had failed to "amply" fund public education for
   Washington's 1 million school children. Washington state has budgeted
   $18.2 billion for education spending in the two-year fiscal period
   ending in July 2015, whereby the Supreme Court decided that this budget
   must be boosted by $3.3 billion in total by July 2019. Recently on
   September 11, 2014 Supreme Court on Thursday found the legislature in
   contempt for failing to uphold a court order to come up with a plan to
   boost its education budget by billions of dollars over the next five
   years. The state had argued that it had adequately funded education and
   said diverting tax revenue could lead to shortfalls in other public
   services.^[83]

   Pensions

   While the hiring teachers for public schools is done at the local
   school district level, the pension funds for teachers are usually
   managed at the state level. Some states have significant deficits when
   future requirements for teacher pensions are examined. In 2014, these
   were projected deficits for various states: Illinois -$187 billion,
   Connecticut -$57 billion, Kentucky -$41 billion, Hawaii -$16.5 billion,
   and Louisiana -$45.6 billion. These deficits range from 184% to 318% of
   these states annual total budget.^[84]

Test performance for primary and secondary schools[edit]

   The test scores of students attending U.S. public schools are lower
   than student scores in schools of other developed countries, in the
   areas of reading, math, and science.^[85]

   Out of 21 industrialized countries, U.S. 12th graders ranked 19th in
   math, 16th in science, and last in advanced physics.

Higher education[edit]

   CAPTION: Educational attainment in the United States, Age 25 and Over
   (2009)^[86]

                Education              Percentage
   High school graduate                    86.68%
   Some college                            55.60%
   Associates and/or Bachelor's degree     38.54%
   Bachelor's degree                        29.0%
   Master's degree                          7.62%
   Doctorate or professional degree         2.94%
   Main article: Higher education in the United States
   Alumni Hall at Saint Anselm College
   A group of people in suits standing in three rows on the steps in front
   of a stone building.
   The University of Chicago team that worked on the production of the
   world's first man-made, self-sustaining nuclear reaction, including
   Enrico Fermi in the front row and Leó Szilárd in the second.

   Higher education in the United States is an optional final stage of
   formal learning following secondary education, often at one of the
   4,495 colleges or universities and junior colleges in the country.^[87]
   In 2008, 36% of enrolled students graduated from college in four years.
   57% completed their undergraduate requirements in six years, at the
   same college they first enrolled in.^[88] The U.S. ranks 10th among
   industrial countries for percentage of adults with college
   degrees.^[23]

   Like high school, the four undergraduate grades are commonly called
   freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior years (alternatively called
   first year, second year, etc.). Students traditionally apply for
   admission into colleges. Schools differ in their competitiveness and
   reputation. Admissions criteria involve the rigor and grades earned in
   high school courses taken, the students' GPA, class ranking, and
   standardized test scores (Such as the SAT or the ACT tests). Most
   colleges also consider more subjective factors such as a commitment to
   extracurricular activities, a personal essay, and an interview. While
   colleges will rarely list that they require a certain standardized test
   score, class ranking, or GPA for admission, each college usually has a
   rough threshold below which admission is unlikely.^[citation needed]

   Once admitted, students engage in undergraduate study, which consists
   of satisfying university and class requirements to achieve a bachelor's
   degree in a field of concentration known as a major. (Some students
   enroll in double majors or "minor" in another field of study.) The most
   common method consists of four years of study leading to a Bachelor of
   Arts (B.A.), a Bachelor of Science (B.S.), or sometimes another
   bachelor's degree such as Bachelor of Fine Arts (B.F.A.), Bachelor of
   Social Work (B.S.W.), Bachelor of Engineering (B.Eng.,) or Bachelor of
   Philosophy (B.Phil.) Five-Year Professional Architecture programs offer
   the Bachelor of Architecture Degree (B.Arch.)

   Professional degrees such as law, medicine, pharmacy, and dentistry,
   are offered as graduate study after earning at least three years of
   undergraduate schooling or after earning a bachelor's degree depending
   on the program. These professional fields do not require a specific
   undergraduate major, though medicine, pharmacy, and dentistry have set
   prerequisite courses that must be taken before enrollment.^[citation
   needed]

   Some students choose to attend a community college for two years prior
   to further study at another college or university. In most states,
   community colleges are operated either by a division of the state
   university or by local special districts subject to guidance from a
   state agency. Community colleges may award Associate of Arts (AA) or
   Associate of Science (AS) degree after two years. Those seeking to
   continue their education may transfer to a four-year college or
   university (after applying through a similar admissions process as
   those applying directly to the four-year institution, see
   articulation). Some community colleges have automatic enrollment
   agreements with a local four-year college, where the community college
   provides the first two years of study and the university provides the
   remaining years of study, sometimes all on one campus. The community
   college awards the associate's degree, and the university awards the
   bachelor's and master's degrees.^[citation needed]

   Graduate study, conducted after obtaining an initial degree and
   sometimes after several years of professional work, leads to a more
   advanced degree such as a master's degree, which could be a Master of
   Arts (MA), Master of Science (MS), Master of Business Administration
   (MBA), or other less common master's degrees such as Master of
   Education (MEd), and Master of Fine Arts (MFA). Some students pursue a
   graduate degree that is in between a master's degree and a doctoral
   degree called a Specialist in Education (Ed.S.).

   After additional years of study and sometimes in conjunction with the
   completion of a master's degree and/or Ed.S. degree, students may earn
   a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) or other doctoral degree, such as Doctor
   of Arts, Doctor of Education, Doctor of Theology, Doctor of Medicine,
   Doctor of Pharmacy, Doctor of Physical Therapy, Doctor of Osteopathic
   Medicine, Doctor of Podiatry Medicine, Doctor of Veterinary Medicine,
   Doctor of Psychology, or Juris Doctor. Some programs, such as medicine
   and psychology, have formal apprenticeship procedures post-graduation,
   such as residencies and internships, which must be completed after
   graduation and before one is considered fully trained. Other
   professional programs like law and business have no formal
   apprenticeship requirements after graduation (although law school
   graduates must take the bar exam to legally practice law in nearly all
   states).

   Entrance into graduate programs usually depends upon a student's
   undergraduate academic performance or professional experience as well
   as their score on a standardized entrance exam like the Graduate Record
   Examination (GRE-graduate schools in general), the Medical College
   Admission Test (MCAT), or the Law School Admission Test (LSAT). Many
   graduate and law schools do not require experience after earning a
   bachelor's degree to enter their programs; however, business school
   candidates are usually required to gain a few years of professional
   work experience before applying. 8.9 percent of students receive
   postgraduate degrees. Most, after obtaining their bachelor's degree,
   proceed directly into the workforce.^[89]

Cost[edit]

   Study comparing college revenue per student by tuition and state
   funding in 2008 dollars.^[90]
   Cost of US college education relative to the consumer price index
   (inflation).
   See also: College tuition in the United States

   A few charity institutions cover all of the students' tuition, although
   scholarships (both merit-based and need-based) are widely available.
   Generally, private universities charge much higher tuition than their
   public counterparts, which rely on state funds to make up the
   difference. Because each state supports its own university system with
   state taxes, most public universities charge much higher rates for
   out-of-state students.^[citation needed]

   Annual undergraduate tuition varies widely from state to state, and
   many additional fees apply. In 2009, average annual tuition at a public
   university (for residents of the state) was $7,020.^[88] Tuition for
   public school students from outside the state is generally comparable
   to private school prices, although students can often qualify for state
   residency after their first year. Private schools are typically much
   higher, although prices vary widely from "no-frills" private schools to
   highly specialized technical institutes. Depending upon the type of
   school and program, annual graduate program tuition can vary from
   $15,000 to as high as $50,000. Note that these prices do not include
   living expenses (rent, room/board, etc.) or additional fees that
   schools add on such as "activities fees" or health insurance. These
   fees, especially room and board, can range from $6,000 to $12,000 per
   academic year (assuming a single student without children).^[91]

   The mean annual Total Cost (including all costs associated with a
   full-time post-secondary schooling, such as tuition and fees, books and
   supplies, room and board), as reported by collegeboard.com for
   2010:^[92]
     * Public University (4 years): $27,967 (per year)
     * Private University (4 years): $40,476 (per year)

   Total, four-year schooling:
     * Public University: $111,868
     * Private University: $161,904

   College costs are rising at the same time that state appropriations for
   aid are shrinking. This has led to debate over funding at both the
   state and local levels. From 2002 to 2004 alone, tuition rates at
   public schools increased over 14 percent, largely due to dwindling
   state funding. An increase of 6 percent occurred over the same period
   for private schools.^[91] Between 1982 and 2007, college tuition and
   fees rose three times as fast as median family income, in constant
   dollars.^[93]

   From the US Census Bureau, the median salary of an individual who has
   only a high school diploma is $27,967; The median salary of an
   individual who has a bachelor's degree is $47,345.^[94] Certain
   degrees, such as in engineering, typically result in salaries far
   exceeding high school graduates, whereas degrees in teaching and social
   work fall below.^[citation needed]

   The debt of the average college graduate for student loans in 2010 was
   $23,200.^[95]

   A 2010 study indicates that the return on investment for graduating
   from the top 1000 colleges exceeds 4% over a high school degree.^[96]

   According to Uni in the USA, "One of the reasons American universities
   have thrived is due to their remarkable management of financial
   resources."^[97] To combat costs colleges have hired adjunct professors
   to teach. In 2008 these teachers cost about $1,800 per 3-credit class
   as opposed to $8,000 per class for a tenured professor. Two-thirds of
   college instructors were adjuncts. There are differences of opinion
   whether these adjuncts teach better or worse than regular professors.
   There is a suspicion that student evaluation of adjuncts, along with
   their subsequent continued employment, can lead to grade
   inflation.^[98]

The status ladder[edit]

   American college and university faculty, staff, alumni, students, and
   applicants monitor rankings produced by magazines such as U.S. News and
   World Report, Academic Ranking of World Universities, test preparation
   services such as The Princeton Review or another university itself such
   as the Top American Research Universities by the University of
   Florida's The Center.^[99] These rankings are based on factors like
   brand recognition, selectivity in admissions, generosity of alumni
   donors, and volume of faculty research. In the Times Higher Education
   World University Rankings, 27 of the top 50 universities, and 72
   institutions of the top 200, are located within the United
   States.^[100] The US has thereby more than twice as many universities
   represented in the top 200 as does the country with the next highest
   number, the United Kingdom, which has 29. A small percentage of
   students who apply to these schools gain admission.^[101]

   Included among the top 20 institutions identified by ARWU in 2009 are
   six of the eight schools in the Ivy League; 4 of the 10 schools in the
   University of California system (Berkeley, Los Angeles, San Diego and
   San Francisco); the private Universities of Stanford, Chicago, and
   Johns Hopkins; the public Universities of Washington and Wisconsin; and
   the Massachusetts and California Institutes of Technology.^[102]

   Also renowned within the United States are the so-called Little Ivies
   and a number of prestigious liberal arts colleges. Certain public
   universities (sometimes referred to as Public Ivies) are also
   recognized for their outstanding record in scholarship. Some of these
   institutions currently place among the elite in certain measurements of
   graduate education and research, especially among engineering and
   medical schools.^[103]^[104]

   Each state in the United States maintains its own public university
   system, which is always non-profit. The State University of New York
   and the California State University are the largest public higher
   education systems in the United States; SUNY is the largest system that
   includes community colleges, while CSU is the largest without. Most
   areas also have private institutions, which may be for-profit or
   non-profit. Unlike many other nations, there are no public universities
   at the national level outside of the military service academies.

   Prospective students applying to attend four of the five military
   academies require, with limited exceptions, nomination by a member of
   Congress. Like acceptance to "top tier" universities, competition for
   these limited nominations is intense and must be accompanied by
   superior scholastic achievement and evidence of "leadership potential."

   Aside from these aforementioned schools, academic reputations vary
   widely among the 'middle-tier' of American schools, (and even among
   academic departments within each of these schools.) Most public and
   private institutions fall into this 'middle' range. Some institutions
   feature honors colleges or other rigorous programs that challenge
   academically exceptional students, who might otherwise attend a
   'top-tier' college.^[105]^[106] Aware of the status attached to the
   perception of the college that they attend, students often apply to a
   range of schools. Some apply to a relatively prestigious school with a
   low acceptance rate, gambling on the chance of acceptance, and also
   apply to a safety school,^[107] to which they will (almost) certainly
   gain admission.

   Lower status institutions include community colleges. These are
   primarily two-year public institutions, which individual states usually
   require to accept all local residents who seek admission, and offer
   associate's degrees or vocational certificate programs. Many community
   colleges have relationships with four-year state universities and
   colleges or even private universities that enable their students to
   transfer to these universities for a four-year degree after completing
   a two-year program at the community college.^[citation needed]

   Regardless of perceived prestige, many institutions feature at least
   one distinguished academic department, and most post-secondary American
   students attend one of the 2,400 four-year colleges and universities or
   1,700 two-year colleges not included among the twenty-five or so
   'top-tier' institutions.^[108]

Criticism[edit]

   A college economics professor has blamed credential inflation for the
   admission of so many unqualified students into college. He reports that
   the number of new jobs requiring college degrees is less than the
   number of college graduates.^[23] The same professor reports that the
   more money that a state spends on higher education, the slower the
   economy grows, the opposite of long held notions.^[23] Other studies
   have shown that the level of cognitive achievement attained by students
   in a country (as measured by academic testing) is closely correlated
   with the country's economic growth, but that "increasing the average
   number of years of schooling attained by the labor force boosts the
   economy only when increased levels of school attainment also boost
   cognitive skills. In other words, it is not enough simply to spend more
   time in school; something has to be learned there."^[109]

Funding for college[edit]

   At the college and university level student loan funding is split in
   half; half is managed by the Department of Education directly, called
   the Federal Direct Student Loan Program (FDSLP). The other half is
   managed by commercial entities such as banks, credit unions, and
   financial services firms such as Sallie Mae, under the Federal Family
   Education Loan Program (FFELP). Some schools accept only FFELP loans;
   others accept only FDSLP. Still others accept both, and a few schools
   will not accept either, in which case students must seek out private
   alternatives for student loans.^[110]

   Grant funding is provided by the federal Pell Grant program.

Issues[edit]

   ^[clarification needed]
   See also: List of issues in education in the United States and
   Education reform

   Major educational issues in the United States center on curriculum and
   control. Of critical importance, because of its enormous implications
   on education and funding, is the No Child Left Behind Act.^[53]

Affirmative action[edit]

   Further information: Affirmative action in the United States
   Acceptance Rates at Private Universities (2005)^[111]
   Overall Admit Rate Black Admit Rate  % Difference
   Harvard 10.0% 16.7% + 67.0%
   MIT 15.9% 31.6% + 98.7%
   Brown 16.6% 26.3% + 58.4%
   Penn 21.2% 30.1% + 42.0%
   Georgetown 22.0% 30.7% + 39.5%

   In 2003 a Supreme Court decision concerning affirmative action in
   universities allowed educational institutions to consider race as a
   factor in admitting students, but ruled that strict point systems are
   unconstitutional.^[112] Opponents of racial affirmative action argue
   that the program actually benefits middle- and upper-class people of
   color at the expense of lower class European Americans and Asian
   Americans.^[113]

   Prominent African American academics Henry Louis Gates and Lani
   Guinier, while favoring affirmative action, have argued that in
   practice, it has led to recent black immigrants and their children
   being greatly overrepresented at elite institutions, at the expense of
   the historic African American community made up of descendants of
   slaves.^[114] In 2006, Jian Li, a Chinese undergraduate at Yale
   University, filed a civil rights complaint with the Office for Civil
   Rights against Princeton University, claiming that his race played a
   role in their decision to reject his application for admission.^[115]

Attainment[edit]

   Main article: Educational attainment in the United States
   Educational attainment since 1940.^[116]

   The rise of the high school movement in the beginning of the 20th
   century was unique in the United States, such that, high schools were
   implemented with property-tax funded tuition, openness,
   non-exclusivity, and were decentralized.

   The academic curriculum was designed to provide the students with a
   terminal degree. The students obtained general knowledge (such as
   mathematics, chemistry, English composition, etc.) applicable to the
   high geographic and social mobility in the United States. The provision
   of the high schools accelerated with the rise of the second industrial
   revolution. The increase in white collar and skilled blue-collar work
   in manufacturing was reflected in the demand for high school education.

   In the 21st century, the educational attainment of the US population is
   similar to that of many other industrialized countries with the vast
   majority of the population having completed secondary education and a
   rising number of college graduates that outnumber high school dropouts.
   As a whole, the population of the United States is becoming
   increasingly more educated.^[116]

   Post-secondary education is valued very highly by American society and
   is one of the main determinants of class and status.^[citation needed]
   As with income, however, there are significant discrepancies in terms
   of race, age, household configuration and geography.^[117]

   Since the 1980s the number of educated Americans has continued to grow,
   but at a slower rate. Some have attributed this to an increase in the
   foreign born portion of the workforce. However, the decreasing growth
   of the educational workforce has instead been primarily due to slowing
   down in educational attainment of people schooled in the United
   States.^[118]

Student quality and college dropout rate[edit]

   44% of college faculty believe that incoming students are not ready for
   writing at the college level, while 90% of high school teachers believe
   exiting students are well-prepared.^[119]^[120]^[121]^[122]

   Dropout rates are a concern in American four-year colleges. In New
   York, 54 percent of students entering four-year colleges in 1997 had a
   degree six years later — and even fewer Hispanics and blacks did.^[123]
   33 percent of the freshmen who enter the University of Massachusetts
   Boston graduate within six years. Less than 41 percent graduate from
   the University of Montana, and 44 percent from the University of New
   Mexico.^[124]

Gender differences[edit]

   Boys have underperformed girls for a number of years. On average, girls
   stand higher in their classes and perform well in all subjects. This is
   a turnaround from the early 20th century when boys usually outperformed
   girls. Parents and educators are concerned about how to motivate boys
   to become better students.^[125]

Racial achievement differences[edit]

   Further information: Racial achievement gap in the United States, Race
   and intelligence and African-American family structure
   NAEP reading long-term trends for ages 9 (light gray), 13 (dark gray),
   and 17 (black).

   The racial achievement gap in the US refers to the educational
   disparities between minority students and Asian and Caucasian
   students.^[126] This disparity manifests itself in a variety of ways:
   African-American and Hispanic students are more likely to receive lower
   grades, score lower on standardized tests, drop out of high school, and
   are less likely to enter and complete college.^[127]

   Professor Lino Graglia has suggested that Blacks and Hispanics are
   falling behind in education because they are increasingly raised in
   single-parent families.^[128]^[129] On the other hand, the late UC
   Berkeley professor Arthur Jensen, in a controversial paper published in
   1969, argued that the achievement gap was the result of IQ differences
   between blacks and whites.

   Though the conclusions reached by Jensen in this study have been proven
   to be insufficient to prove a genetic component between IQ and
   race,^[130] some members of the academic community accept these
   findings as fact.^[131] The racial achievement gap is complicated by
   issues of social class, institutional racism, and civil injustice. Some
   authors claim that such a gap exists independently of these factors
   both in the United States^[132] and world-wide.^[133] A prominent
   biologist, Stephen Jay Gould wrote one of the most prominent critiques
   of such findings^[134] and the issue remains controversial.

International comparison[edit]

   In the OECD's Programme for International Student Assessment 2003,
   which emphasizes problem solving, American 15 year olds ranked 24th of
   38 in mathematics, 19th of 38 in science, 12th of 38 in reading, and
   26th of 38 in problem solving.^[135] In the 2006 assessment, the U.S.
   ranked 35th out of 57 in mathematics and 29th out of 57 in science.
   Reading scores could not be reported due to printing errors in the
   instructions of the U.S. test booklets. U.S. scores were behind those
   of most other developed nations.^[136]

   However, the picture changes when low achievers, Blacks and Hispanics,
   in the U.S. are broken out by race. White and Asian students in the
   United States are generally among the best-performing pupils in the
   world; black and Hispanic students in the U.S. have very high rates of
   low achievement. Black and Hispanic students in the US do out perform
   their counterparts in all African and Hispanic countries.^[137]^[138]

   US fourth and eighth graders tested above average on the Trends in
   International Mathematics and Science Study tests, which emphasizes
   traditional learning.^[139]

Wider economic impact[edit]

   Current education trends in the United States represent multiple
   achievement gaps across ethnicities, income levels, and geography. In
   an economic analysis, consulting firm McKinsey & Company reports that
   closing the educational achievement gap between the United States and
   nations such as Finland and Korea would have increased US GDP by
   9-to-16% in 2008.^[140]

   Narrowing the gap between white students and black and Hispanic
   students would have added another 2-4% GDP, while closing the gap
   between poor and other students would have yielded a 3-to-5% increase
   in GDP, and that of under-performing states and the rest of the nation
   another 3-to-5% GDP. In sum, McKinsey's report suggests, “These
   educational gaps impose on the United States the economic equivalent of
   a permanent national recession.”^[140]

   Overall the households and demographics featuring the highest
   educational attainment in the United States are also among those with
   the highest household income and wealth. Thus, while the population of
   the US is becoming increasingly educated on all levels, a direct link
   between income and educational attainment remains.^[117]

   ACT Inc. reports that 25% of US graduating high school seniors meet
   college-readiness benchmarks in English, reading, mathematics, and
   science.^[141] Including the 22% of students who do not graduate on
   time, fewer than 20% of the American youth, who should graduate high
   school each year, do so prepared for college.^[142] The United States
   has fallen behind the rest of the developed world in education,
   creating a global achievement gap that alone costs the nation 9-to-16%
   of potential GDP each year.^[143]

   In 2007, Americans stood second only to Canada in the percentage of 35
   to 64 year olds holding at least two-year degrees. Among 25 to 34 year
   olds, the country stands tenth. The nation stands 15 out of 29 rated
   nations for college completion rates, slightly above Mexico and
   Turkey.^[93]

   A five-year, $14 million study of U.S. adult literacy involving lengthy
   interviews of U.S. adults, the most comprehensive study of literacy
   ever commissioned by the U.S. government,^[144] was released in
   September 1993. It involved lengthy interviews of over 26,700 adults
   statistically balanced for age, gender, ethnicity, education level, and
   location (urban, suburban, or rural) in 12 states across the U.S. and
   was designed to represent the U.S. population as a whole. This
   government study showed that 21% to 23% of adult Americans were not
   "able to locate information in text", could not "make low-level
   inferences using printed materials", and were unable to "integrate
   easily identifiable pieces of information."^[144]

   The U.S. Department of Education's 2003 statistics indicated that 14%
   of the population – or 32 million adults – had very low literacy
   skills.^[145] Statistics were similar in 2013.^[146]

Behavior[edit]

Race[edit]

   Nationally, one in every six black students is suspended compared to
   one in 20 white students. A 2011 study found that students who were
   expelled were three times as likely to become involved with the
   juvenile justice system the following school year.^[147]

School security[edit]

   For some schools, a police officer, titled a school resource officer,
   is on site to screen students for firearms and to help avoid
   disruptions.^[148]^[149]^[citation needed]

   Many schools have nurses either full-time or part-time to administer to
   students and to ensure that medication is taken as directed by their
   physician.^[150]

Cheating[edit]

   Main article: Academic dishonesty

   From 50% to 95% of American students admit to have cheated in high
   school or college at one time or another. These poll results cast some
   doubt on measured academic attainment tests.^[151]

Curriculum[edit]

   President George W. Bush signing the No Child Left Behind Act

   Curricula in the United States vary widely from district to district.
   Not only do schools offer a range of topics and quality, but private
   schools may include religious classes as mandatory for attendance. This
   raises the question of government funding vouchers in states with
   anti-Catholic Blaine Amendments in their constitution. This has
   produced camps of argument over the standardization of curricula and to
   what degree. These same groups often are advocates of standardized
   testing, which is mandated by the No Child Left Behind Act.

   There is debate over which subjects should receive the most focus, with
   astronomy and geography among those cited as not being taught enough in
   schools.^[152]^[153]^[154]

English in the classroom[edit]

   An issue facing curricula today is the use of the English language in
   teaching. English is spoken by over 95% of the nation, and there is a
   strong national tradition of upholding English as the de facto official
   language. Some 9.7 million children aged 5 to 17 primarily speak a
   language other than English at home. Of those, about 1.3 million
   children do not speak English well or at all.^[155]

Evolution in Kansas[edit]

   In 1999 the School Board of the state of Kansas caused controversy when
   it decided to eliminate teaching of evolution in its state assessment
   tests.^[156] Scientists from around the country demurred.^[157] Many
   religious and family values groups, on the other hand, claimed that
   evolution is simply a theory in the colloquial sense,^[158] and as such
   creationist ideas should therefore be taught alongside it as an
   alternative viewpoint.^[159] A majority supported teaching intelligent
   design and/or creationism in public schools.^[160]

Sex education[edit]

   Main article: Sex education in the United States

   Almost all students in the U.S. receive some form of sex education at
   least once between grades 7 and 12; many schools begin addressing some
   topics as early as grades 4 or 5.^[161] However, what students learn
   varies widely, because curriculum decisions are so decentralized. Many
   states have laws governing what is taught in sex education classes or
   allowing parents to opt out. Some state laws leave curriculum decisions
   to individual school districts.^[162]

   For example, a 1999 study by the Guttmacher Institute found that most
   U.S. sex education courses in grades 7 through 12 cover puberty, HIV,
   STDs, abstinence, implications of teenage pregnancy, and how to resist
   peer pressure. Other studied topics, such as methods of birth control
   and infection prevention, sexual orientation, sexual abuse, and factual
   and ethical information about abortion, varied more widely.^[163]

   However, according to a 2004 survey, a majority of the 1001 parent
   groups polled wants complete sex education in the schools. The American
   people are heavily divided over the issue. Over 80% of polled parents
   agreed with the statement "Sex education in school makes it easier for
   me to talk to my child about sexual issues," while under 17% agreed
   with the statement that their children were being exposed to "subjects
   I don't think my child should be discussing." 10 percent believed that
   their children's sexual education class forced them to discuss sexual
   issues "too early." On the other hand, 49 percent of the respondents
   (the largest group) were "somewhat confident" that the values taught in
   their children's sex ed classes were similar to those taught at home,
   and 23 percent were less confident still. (The margin of error was plus
   or minus 4.7 percent.)^[164]

Textbook review and adoption[edit]

   In some states, textbooks are selected for all students at the state
   level, and decisions made by larger states, such as California and
   Texas, that represent a considerable market for textbook publishers and
   can exert influence over the content of textbooks generally, thereby
   influencing the curriculum taught in public schools,^[165]

   In 2010, the Texas Board of Education passed more than 100 amendments
   to the curriculum standards, affecting history, sociology and economics
   courses to 'add balance' given that academia was 'skewed too far to the
   left'.^[166]

   This effect is however reduced with modern publishing techniques which
   allow books to be tailored to individual states.^[166]

   As of January 2009, the four largest college textbook publishers in the
   United States were: Pearson Education (including such imprints as
   Addison-Wesley and Prentice Hall), Cengage Learning (formerly Thomson
   Learning), McGraw-Hill Education, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.^[citation
   needed] Other US textbook publishers include: John Wiley & Sons, Jones
   and Bartlett Publishers, F. A. Davis Company, W. W. Norton & Company,
   SAGE Publications, and Flat World Knowledge.

Governance[edit]

   There is some debate about where control for education actually lies.
   Education is not mentioned in the constitution of the United States. In
   the current situation, the state and national governments have a
   power-sharing arrangement, with the states exercising most of the
   control. Like other arrangements between the two, the federal
   government uses the threat of decreased funding to enforce laws
   pertaining to education.^[70] Furthermore, within each state there are
   different types of control. Some states have a statewide school system,
   while others delegate power to county, city or township-level school
   boards. However, under the Bush administration, initiatives such as the
   No Child Left Behind Act have attempted to assert more central control
   in a heavily decentralized system.

   Many cities have their own school boards everywhere in the United
   States. With the exception of cities, outside the northeast U.S. school
   boards are generally constituted at the county level.

   The U.S. federal government exercises its control through the U.S.
   Department of Education. Educational accreditation decisions are made
   by voluntary regional associations. Schools in the 50 states, the
   District of Columbia, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, and the Northern
   Mariana Islands, teach in English, while schools in the commonwealth of
   Puerto Rico teach in Spanish. Nonprofit private schools are widespread,
   are largely independent of the government, and include secular as well
   as parochial schools.

Tracking (streaming)[edit]

   See also: Tracking (education)

   Tracking is the practice of dividing students at the primary or
   secondary school level into separate classes, depending if the student
   is high, average, or low achievers. It also offers different curriculum
   paths for students headed for college and for those who are bound
   directly for the workplace or technical schools.^[citation needed]

Charter schools[edit]

   Main article: Charter schools in the United States

   The charter school movement began in 1990 and have spread rapidly in
   the United States, members, parents, teachers, and students to allow
   for the "expression of diverse teaching philosophies and cultural and
   social life styles." ^[167]

Reading and writing habits[edit]

   Libraries have been considered important to educational goals.^[168]
   Library books are more readily available to Americans than to people in
   Germany, Britain, France, the Netherlands, Austria and all the
   Mediterranean nations. The average American borrowed more library books
   in 2001 than his or her peers in Germany, Austria, Norway, Ireland,
   Luxembourg, France and throughout the Mediterranean.^[169] Americans
   buy more books than people in Europe.^[169]

   Teachers have been frustrated with lack of parent involvement in the
   learning process, particularly in the earlier grades. Children spend
   about 8% of their time in school, sleep 40%, leaving about 50% of their
   time when they are not in school. Teachers believe that parents are not
   supervising their children's free time to encourage the learning
   process, such as basic literacy, crucial to not only later success in
   life, but keeping out of prison.^[170]

See also[edit]

   Portal icon United States portal
   Portal icon Education portal
     * Academic grading in the United States
     * College Board examinations
     * Education in the Thirteen Colonies
     * List of dropouts in the United States
     * List of heads of state educated in the United States
     * List of state graduation exams in the United States
     * Lists of school districts in the United States
     * Outcome-based education
     * Race to Nowhere (documentary film)
     * Roots of Empathy
     * Social programs in the United States and education
     * Two Million Minutes (documentary film)
     * Blab school

References[edit]

    1. ^ "Bureau, U. C. (2009). The 2009 Statistical Abstract, Retrieved
       from National Data Book" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-09-21.
    2. ^ ^a ^b "The World Factbook". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
    3. ^ U.S. Bachelor Degree Rate Passes Milestone
    4. ^ "School Finance". Federal Education Budget Project. New America
       Foundation. Retrieved 21 May 2013.
    5. ^ {{cite^[citation needed]
       web|url=http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=372 |title=Fast
       Facts |publisher=Nces.ed.gov |accessdate=2013-09-21}}
    6. ^ "State Compulsory School Attendance Laws". infoplease.com.
       Retrieved December 19, 2007.
    7. ^ Samuel Read Hall Biography at the Old Stone House Museum website,
       Retrieved on 2009-07-03
    8. ^ "An early Yankee Educator". Melrosemirror.media.mit.edu.
       2005-04-01. Retrieved 2014-01-16.
    9. ^ Paul Monroe, "A cyclopedia of education" (4 vol. 1911) covers
       each state
   10. ^ Campbell, pp 78-9, 226-7
   11. ^ Grace Palladino, Teenagers: An American History (1996) p 66
   12. ^ Steven Mintz, Huck's Raft: A History of American Childhood (2006)
       pp 258-9
   13. ^ Nordin, Virginia Davis; Turner, William Lloyd (1980). "More than
       Segregation Academies: The Growing Protestant Fundamentalist
       Schools". The Phi Delta Kappan 61 (6): 391–394.  |accessdate=
       requires |url= (help)
   14. ^ Carper, James C. (1983). "The Christian Day School Movement". The
       Educational Forum 47 (2): 135–149. doi:10.1080/00131728309335955.
       |accessdate= requires |url= (help)
   15. ^ Carper, James C.; Layman, Jack (1995). "Independent Christian Day
       Schools Past, Present, and Prognosis". Journal of Research on
       Christian Education 4 (1): 7–19. doi:10.1080/10656219509484824.
       |accessdate= requires |url= (help)
   16. ^ "The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 forbids
       federally determined curricula." Hoover Institution – Daily Report
       Archives – Secretary Riley Reignites the Math Wars
   17. ^ Gaddy, Laura (October 22, 2013). "Stricter Pell Grant terms cost
       students at smaller schools, officials say". Anniston Star.
       Retrieved November 1, 2013.
   18. ^ Jesse Rhodes (2012). An Education in Politics: The Origins and
       Evolution of No Child Left Behind. Cornell U.P. pp. 179–81.
   19. ^ Steven Brill (2011). Class Warfare: Inside the Fight to Fix
       America's Schools. Simon and Schuster. p. 84.
   20. ^ Archived: Fact Sheet on No Child Left Behind
   21. ^ "Zeman vs Simmon-Harris, US Supreme Court certoriari 00-1751".
       findlaw.com. 2002-06-27.
   22. ^ [1]^[dead link]
   23. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Zagier, Alan Scher (6 June 2010). "Rethinking the
       four-year degree". Washington Post: Washington Post. pp. A2.
   24. ^ A First Look at the Literacy of America's Adults in the 21st
       Century, U.S. Department of Education, 2003. Accessed May 13, 2006.
       Two percent of the population do not have minimal literacy and 14%
       have Below Basic prose literacy.
   25. ^ Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), OECD,
       reading literacy, science literacy and mathematics literacy all
       rank near the bottom of OECD-countries,
   26. ^ Ripley, Amanda (December 8, 2008). Can She Save our Schools. Time
       Magazine.
   27. ^ [2]^[dead link]
   28. ^ Education at Glance 2005 by OECD: Participation in continuing
       education and training
   29. ^ "Scientific Literacy: How Do Americans Stack Up?." Science Daily.
   30. ^ ^a ^b "School Nurses". Merritt Island, Florida: Space Coast
       Medicine and Healthy Living. March–April 2009. pp. 21–33.
   31. ^ ^a ^b "American Education System – Education System in United
       States of America – USA Education System". Indobase.com. Retrieved
       2010-04-14.
   32. ^ Structure of U.S. Education. U.S. Network for Education
       Information: U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved August 13,
       2013.
   33. ^ "Age range for compulsory school attendance and special education
       services, and policies on year-round schools and kindergarten
       programs". Nces.ed.gov. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   34. ^ ^a ^b "Education. United States Census (2000)".
       Factfinder.census.gov. Retrieved 2013-09-21. ^[dead link]
   35. ^ ^a ^b "News". US Census. 2011-04-11.
   36. ^ Kathleen Kingsbury (2008-08-14). "Four-Day School Weeks". Time
       magazine.
   37. ^ "K-12 Facts". Center for Education Reform. 2011-02-26. ^[dead
       link]
   38. ^ Amurao, Carla (February 21, 2013). "Fact Sheet: Is the Dropout
       Problem Real?". Tavis Smiley Reports: Episode 6: Education Under
       Arrest. PBS. Retrieved 29 July 2014.
   39. ^ Gerson, Michael (5 January 2010). "Column:More second chances".
       Melbourne, Florida: Florida Today. pp. 7A.
   40. ^ "Return on Educational Investment". Center for American Progress.
       Retrieved 2014-01-16.
   41. ^ The other is Texas
   42. ^ Reed, Matt (12 December 2010). "Tackling 'achievement gap' hurts
       US schools". Florida Today (Melbourne, Florida). pp. 1B.
   43. ^ Streufert, Duane (February 10, 20005). "The original Pledge of
       Allegiance". usflag.org.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
   44. ^ google.com. CiteSeerX: 10.1.1.144.6659.
   45. ^ Reed, Matt (April 24, 2012). "Dumb, overpaid teachers gouging
       U.S. taxpayers?". Florida Today (Melbourne, Florida). pp. 7A.
   46. ^ "6 Most Popular Milspouse Jobs". USAA Magazine (San Antonio,
       Texas). Fall 2012. p. 7.
   47. ^ Home Page
   48. ^ "Supreme Court and School Busing". United Press International.
       1999-01-07. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   49. ^ gcsnc.com^[dead link]
   50. ^ "Digest of Education Statistics, 2001" (PDF). Retrieved
       2010-04-14.
   51. ^ ^a ^b "Illinois State Board of Education – Illinois Learning
       Standards". Isbe.state.il.us. Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   52. ^ [3]^[dead link]
   53. ^ ^a ^b "Executive Summary of the No Child Left Behind Act of
       2001". U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   54. ^ Reynolds & Van Tuyle, 2012
   55. ^ ^a ^b Rural Education, 2011
   56. ^ "Opponents of standardized education". Undeferredliving.com.
       2012-09-20. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   57. ^ "Wasted Brilliance: Slavery of the Industrial Mind and the Path
       to Freedom and Success". Undeferredliving. 2013-09-09. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   58. ^ "Four Years to Nowhere: College Degrees, Zombies, and the Future
       of Education". Undeferredliving. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   59. ^ "America’s Problem: How the World is "Beating Us" in a Battle We
       Don’t Necessarily Want to Win". Undeferredliving. 2012-09-20.
       Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   60. ^ Mumm, Graham. Four Years to Nowhere: College Degrees, Zombies,
       and the Future of Education. Undeferred Living.
       http://undeferredliving.com/four-years-to-nowhere-investing-in-a-co
       llege-degree/
   61. ^ Mumm, Graham. Wasted Brilliance: Slavery of the Industrial Mind
       and the Path to Freedom and Success. Undeferred Living.
       http://undeferredliving.com/memorizing-vs-knowing-knowing-facts-is-
       knowing-nothing-theoretical-vs-applicable-knowledge/
   62. ^ ^a ^b Lloyd, Janice, Gannett News Service (January 5, 2008).
       Home-schooling numbers rise. Burlington Free Press.
   63. ^ Home Schools Run By Well-Meaning Amateurs. National Education
       Association.^[dead link]
   64. ^ "Home School Legal Defense Association". Hslda.org. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   65. ^ seizure disorder
   66. ^ "Paper Chase: US government: disabled students must be allowed to
       compete in extracurricular sports". JURIST. 2013-01-26. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   67. ^ "IDEA 2004 Resources". U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   68. ^ Teaching exceptional, diverse, and at-risk students in the
       general education S Vaughn, CS Bos, JS Schumm – 1999
   69. ^ Gillies, R.M. (2004). "The effects of cooperative learning on
       junior high school students during small group learning". Learning
       and Instruction 14 (2): 197–213.
       doi:10.1016/S0959-4752(03)00068-9.
   70. ^ ^a ^b "Federal Role in Education". United States Department of
       Education. 2012-02-13. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   71. ^ Klauke, Amy. Magnet schools. ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational
       Management. Retrieved February 21, 005.
   72. ^ Private schools in the United States
   73. ^ Michael Birnbaum (2009-11-02). "A look at private schools".
       Washington Post (Washington Post). pp. B2.
   74. ^ [4]^[dead link]^[dead link]
   75. ^ "OECD calls for broader access to post-school education and
       training". Oecd.org. 2005-09-13. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   76. ^ "Education Spending Statistics". nationmaster.com.
   77. ^ Coulson, Andrew J. (2006-10-18). "Private Schools Now 33% Off!".
       Cato-at-liberty.org. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   78. ^ "20 Troubling Facts about American Education, William J. Bennett,
       October 1999". Heartland.org. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   79. ^ [5]^[dead link]
   80. ^ "Revenues and Expenditures for Public Elementary and Secondary
       Education, Table 1". National Center for Education Statistics.
       Retrieved 2014-06-04.
   81. ^ Using Market Valuation to Assess the Importance and Efficiency of
       Public School Spending, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
   82. ^ Eric A. Hanushek and Alfred A. Lindseth, Schoolhouses,
       Courthouses, and Statehouses: Solving the funding-achievement
       puzzle in America's public schools (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University Press, 2010)
   83. ^ Cavaliere, Victoria. "Washington's Supreme Court holds state in
       contempt over education". Reuters. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
   84. ^ Racioppi, Dustin (March 23, 2014). "Dire Straits for some state
       pensions". USA Today. pp. 6B. Retrieved March 23, 2014.
   85. ^ "Who's No. 1? Finland, Japan and Korea, Says OECD".
       Siteselection.com. 2001-12-10. Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   86. ^ Note that these add up to more than 100% because they are
       cumulative; e.g. it is assumed that all people with doctorates also
       have undergraduate and high school degrees, and are thus counted
       twice in the "lower" categories. It is not assumed, however, that
       all doctorates or professional degrees have Master's degrees. Age
       25 is used rather than age 18 because there are few people aged 18
       or over with advanced degrees. "Educational Attainment in the
       United States: 2009". U.S. Census Bureau. 22 September 2010.
       Retrieved 13 January 2011.
   87. ^ Nat'l Ctr. for Educ. Statistics, Degree-Granting Institutions and
       Branches, by Type and Control of Institution and State of
       Jurisdiction, 2009–10 (September 2010). Retrieved December 1, 2011
   88. ^ ^a ^b Michelle Singletary (2009-10-22). "The Color of
       Money:Getting through college these days almost requires a degree
       in thrift". Washington Post. pp. 20A.
   89. ^ "Educational attainment of persons 18 years old and over.".
       National Center for Education Statistics. 2005-03-23. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   90. ^ "Trends in College Spending 1998–2008" (PDF). Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   91. ^ ^a ^b "Tuition Levels Rise but Many Students Pay Significantly
       Less than Published Rates". Collegeboard.com. Retrieved
       2013-09-21. ^[dead link]
   92. ^ "College Pricing and Student Aid - Pressroom".
       Press.collegeboard.org. 2013-04-09. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   93. ^ ^a ^b Broder, David S. (columnist) (December 7, 2008). College
       affordability about future. Burlington Free Press (and other column
       subscribers).
   94. ^ "The U.S. Census Bureau (2010)". Retrieved April 24, 2011.
   95. ^ Crowe, Aaron. "Ten things that aren't free - but should be (and
       how to get them for free anyway) - DailyFinance". Walletpop.com.
       Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   96. ^ "College ROI 2013 Methodology". Payscale.com. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   97. ^ "Student Loans For Study Abroad | Scholarship to Study in USA".
       University In The USA. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   98. ^ Clark, Kim (November 17–24, 2008). Does it Matter That Your
       Professor Is Part Time?. US News and World Report.
   99. ^ "The Top American Research Universities". The Center (University
       of Florida). Retrieved 2006-11-07.
   100. ^ "THE World University Rankings: Measure by measure: the US is
       the best of the best". Times Higher Education. 2010-09-16.
       Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   101. ^ "Ivy League College Admissions Facts and Statistics".
       Admissionsconsultants.com. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   102. ^ [6]^[dead link]
   103. ^ the Top American Research Universities by University of Florida
       TheCenter
   104. ^ "America's Best Graduate Schools 2008: Top Engineering Schools".
       usnews.com. Retrieved June 18, 2007.
   105. ^ "Christ College – The Honors College of Valparaiso University".
       Valpo.edu. Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   106. ^ "Honors College". Baylor University. Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   107. ^ More than a 'safety school'
   108. ^ "Number of U.S. Colleges and Universities and Degrees Awarded,
       2005 —". Infoplease.com. Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   109. ^ Eric A. Hanushek, Ludger Woessmann, Eliot A. Jamison and Dean T.
       Jamison, "Education and Economic Growth: It's not just going to
       school, but learning something while there that matters", Education
       Next, Spring 2008 / Vol. 8, No. 2
   110. ^ "Student Loans". Grove City College. Retrieved
       2010-10-06. ^[dead link]
   111. ^ "Acceptance Rates".
   112. ^ "Highlights of the 2002–2003 Supreme Court Term".
       Supct.law.cornell.edu. Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   113. ^ Hurst, C. Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and Consequences.
       Sixth Edition. 2007. 374–377.
   114. ^ Rimer, Sara; Arenson, Karen W. (June 24, 2004). "Top Colleges
       Take More Blacks, But Which Ones?". The New York Times. Retrieved
       February 22, 2011.
   115. ^ "Amid charge of bias, Rapelye stands firm". The Daily
       Princetonian. November 30, 2006.
   116. ^ ^a ^b Ryan, Camille; Siebens, Julie (February 2012).
       "Educational Attainment in the United States: 2009". U.S. Census
       Bureau. Retrieved 25 February 2013.
   117. ^ ^a ^b "US Census Bureau report on educational attainment in the
       United States, 2003". Retrieved 2006-07-31.
   118. ^ Goldin, C., Katz, L.F. The Race between Education and
       Technology. The Belknap Press of the Harvard University Press.
       Cambridge, MA: 2008.
   119. ^ [7]^[dead link]
   120. ^ neumont.edu^[dead link] page 14
   121. ^ ed.gov; page 10
   122. ^ scribd.com page 25
   123. ^ "U.S. college drop-out rate sparks concern", MSNBC, November 15,
       2005
   124. ^ David Leonhardt. "Colleges Are Failing in Graduation Rates", The
       New York Times, September 8, 2009
   125. ^ "Lisa Bloom: How To Talk To Little Boys". Huffingtonpost.com.
       May 3, 2012. Retrieved 2012-07-13.
   126. ^ "Students Affected by Achievement Gaps". NEA. 2008-12-03.
       Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   127. ^ "Research Center: Achievement Gap". Edweek.org. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   128. ^ Parker, Kathleen (December 13, 2012). "Reluctant First Father".
       Florida Today (Melbourne, Florida). pp. 7A.
   129. ^ "Lino Graglia, UT Law Professor, Decries Single Motherhood,
       Black Test Scores, And Affirmative Action (VIDEO)".
       Huffingtonpost.com. 12/11/2012. Retrieved 2013-09-21.  Check date
       values in: |date= (help)
   130. ^ A Review of the Bell Curve: Bad Science Makes for Bad
       Conclusions
   131. ^ Racism and Education: Coincidence or Conspiracy? By David
       Gillborn
   132. ^ Murray, Richard J. Herrnstein, Charles (1994). The bell curve:
       intelligence and class structure in American life ([4. Dr.] ed.).
       New York, N.Y.: Free Press. ISBN 0-02-914673-9.
   133. ^ Lynn, Richard (2008). The global bell curve: race, IQ, and
       inequality worldwide. Augusta, Ga.: Washington Summit Publishers.
       ISBN 978-1-59368-028-2.
   134. ^ Gould, Stephen Jay (1981). The mismeasure of man. (1st ed. ed.).
       New York: Norton. ISBN 0-393-01489-4.
   135. ^ "International Outcomes of Learning in Mathematics Literacy and
       Problem Solving" (PDF). National Center for Education Statistics.
       Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   136. ^ "PISA 2006 Science Competencies for Tomorrow's World Volume 1:
       Analysis." (PDF). Retrieved 2010-04-14.
   137. ^ "Is the US Really a Nation of God-Fearing Darwin-Haters?".
       Spiegel Online. April 6, 2009.
   138. ^ American Achievement in International Perspective, Thomas B.
       Fordham Institute, March 15, 2011 ^[dead link]
   139. ^ Jay Matthews (2009-10-19). "Tests don't always offer right
       answers". Washington Post. pp. 3B.
   140. ^ ^a ^b "McKinsey and Company, "The Economic Impact of the
       Achievement Gap on America’s Schools."" (PDF). April 2009. p. 5.
       Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   141. ^ "The Condition of College & Career Readiness 2012". ACT.
       2013-08-21. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   142. ^ U.S. Department of Education, “Public School Graduates and
       Dropouts from the Common Core Data: School Year 2009-10”
       (provisional data). January 2013.
   143. ^ McKinsey and Company, “The Economic Impact of the Achievement
       Gap on America’s Schools.” April 2009. Forty years ago, the US led
       the world in high school graduation rates; now it is 18th out of 24
       industrial nations. In 1995, the US was tied for first in college
       graduation; it now is 14th.
   144. ^ ^a ^b "Literacy in America" (PDF). National Center for
       Educational Statistics. April 2002. Retrieved 2007-12-11.
   145. ^ Toppo, Greg (2009-01-08). "Literacy study: 1 in 7 U.S. adults
       are unable to read this story". Usatoday.com. Retrieved
       2013-09-21.
   146. ^ "The U.S. Illiteracy Rate Hasn't Changed In 10 Years". The
       Huffington Post. September 6, 2013. Retrieved July 29, 2014.
   147. ^ Doe, John (April 28, 2013). "News". Florida Today (Melbourne,
       Florida). pp. 1A.
   148. ^ School Resource Officers: 2004 National SRO Survey Results
   149. ^ "School Resource Officer". Online Police Academy. Retrieved
       2010-04-14.
   150. ^ "Transfer to". Aft.org. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   151. ^ Reader's Digest, pp. 123–7, March 2006; Cheating: "but everybody
       is doing it".
   152. ^ "Astronomy Education in the United States". Astronomical Society
       of the Pacific. Retrieved 22 October 2010.
   153. ^ "What is GENIP?". Geographic Education National Implementation
       Project. Retrieved 22 October 2010.
   154. ^ Harm de Blij (3 November 1999). "Geographic Education and Public
       Policy". About.com. Retrieved 21 October 2010.
   155. ^ "Summary Tables on Language Use and English Ability: 2000.
       United States Census (2000)". Census.gov. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   156. ^ "Kansas school board's evolution ruling angers science
       community". Cnn.com. 1999-08-12. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   157. ^ "Statements from Scientific and Scholarly Organizations".
       National Center for Science Education. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   158. ^ Myers, P.Z. "Nicholas Wade flails at the philosophy of
       science"^[dead link], Pharyngula, October 9, 2009
   159. ^ Shermer, Michael. Why People Believe Weird Things, Second
       Edition (2002), Henry Holt, Page 142
   160. ^ "Poll: Creationism Trumps Evolution. CBS News Polls (2004)".
       Cbsnews.com. 2009-02-11. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   161. ^ David J. Landry, Susheela Singh and Jacqueline E. Darroch
       (September–October 2000). "Sexuality Education in Fifth and Sixth
       Grades in U.S. Public Schools, 1999". Family Planning Perspectives
       32 (5). doi:10.2307/2648174. PMID 11030258. Retrieved 2007-05-23.
   162. ^ "Sex Education in the U.S.: Policy and Politics" (PDF). Issue
       Update. Kaiser Family Foundation. October 2002. Retrieved
       2007-05-23. ^[dead link]
   163. ^ Jacqueline E. Darroch, David J. Landry and Susheela Singh
       (September–October 2000). "Changing Emphases in Sexuality Education
       In U.S. Public Secondary Schools, 1988–1999". Family Planning
       Perspectives 32 (6). PMID 11030257.  See especially Table 3.
   164. ^ "Sex Education in America – General Public/Parents Survey.
       NPR/Kaiser/Harvard survey (2004)" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   165. ^ Blake, Mariah. "Revisionaries: How a group of Texas
       conservatives is rewriting your kids' textbooks. January/February
       2010". Washingtonmonthly.com. Retrieved 2013-09-21.
   166. ^ ^a ^b "Texas Conservatives win Curriculum Change". New York
       Times.
   167. ^ Herbst, Juergen. School Choice and School Governance: A
       Historical Study of the United States and Germany page 107 2006.
       ISBN 1-4039-7302-4
   168. ^ "Education Commissioner Highlights Importance of Libraries-
       Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education".
       Doe.mass.edu. 2002-06-05. Retrieved 2012-07-13.
   169. ^ ^a ^b "Trans-Atlantic Comparisons, part 2: Why Europeans Have It
       Wrong About Americans". Spiegel Online. May 6, 2009.
   170. ^ Reed, Matt (October 19, 2013). "Brevard's new literacy
       crusade:United Way". Florida Today (Melbourne, Florida). pp. 1A.
       Retrieved October 19, 2013.

Further reading[edit]

     * Sennholz, Hans F., ed. Public Education and Indoctrination, in
       series, The Freeman Classics. Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation
       for Economic Education, 1993. iv, 203 p. N.B.: Sennholz is not
       clearly identified as the editor of this collection of essays on
       the subject, but his editorship seems probable.

Bibliography[edit]

     * Berliner, David C.
     * Woodring, Paul. A Fourth of a Nation. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
       Co., 1957. 255 p. N.B.: Philosophical and practical reflections on
       education, teaching, educational psychology, and the training of
       teachers.

History[edit]

   for more detailed bibliography see History of Education in the United
   States: Bibliography
     * James D. Anderson, The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860–1935
       (University of North Carolina Press, 1988).
     * Axtell, J. The school upon a hill: Education and society in
       colonial New England. Yale University Press. (1974).
     * Maurice R. Berube; American School Reform: Progressive, Equity, and
       Excellence Movements, 1883–1993. 1994. online version
     * Brint, S., & Karabel, J. The Diverted Dream: Community colleges and
       the promise of educational opportunity in America, 1900–1985.
       Oxford University Press. (1989).
     * Button, H. Warren and Provenzo, Eugene F., Jr. History of Education
       and Culture in America. Prentice-Hall, 1983. 379 pp.
     * Cremin, Lawrence A. The transformation of the school: Progressivism
       in American education, 1876–1957. (1961).
     * Cremin, Lawrence A. American Education: The Colonial Experience,
       1607–1783. (1970); American Education: The National Experience,
       1783–1876. (1980); American Education: The Metropolitan Experience,
       1876–1980 (1990); standard 3 vol detailed scholarly history
     * Curti, M. E. The social ideas of American educators, with new
       chapter on the last twenty-five years. (1959).
     * Dorn, Sherman. Creating the Dropout: An Institutional and Social
       History of School Failure. Praeger, 1996. 167 pp.
     * Gatto, John Taylor. The Underground History of American Education:
       An Intimate Investigation into the Prison of Modern Schooling.
       Oxford Village Press, 2001, 412 pp. online version
     * Herbst, Juergen. The once and future school: Three hundred and
       fifty years of American secondary education. (1996).
     * Herbst, Juergen. School Choice and School Governance: A Historical
       Study of the United States and Germany 2006. ISBN 1-4039-7302-4.
     * Kemp, Roger L. "Town & Gown Relations: A Handbook of Best
       Practices," McFarland and Company, Inc., Publisher, Jefferson,
       North Carolina, USA, and London, England (UK)(2013). ISBN
       9780786463992.
     * Krug, Edward A. The shaping of the American high school, 1880–1920.
       (1964); The American high school, 1920–1940. (1972). standard 2 vol
       scholarly history
     * Lucas, C. J. American higher education: A history. (1994). pp.;
       reprinted essays from History of Education Quarterly
     * Parkerson, Donald H. and Parkerson, Jo Ann. Transitions in American
       Education: A Social History of Teaching. Routledge, 2001. 242 pp.
     * Parkerson, Donald H. and Parkerson, Jo Ann. The Emergence of the
       Common School in the U.S. Countryside. Edwin Mellen, 1998. 192 pp.
     * Peterson, Paul E. The politics of school reform, 1870–1940. (1985).
     * Ravitch, Diane. Left Back: A Century of Failed School Reforms.
       Simon & Schuster, 2000. 555 pp.
     * John L. Rury; Education and Social Change: Themes in the History of
       American Schooling.'; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 2002. online
       version
     * Sanders, James W The education of an urban minority: Catholics in
       Chicago, 1833–1965. (1977).
     * Solomon, Barbara M. In the company of educated women: A history of
       women and higher education in America. (1985).
     * Theobald, Paul. Call School: Rural Education in the Midwest to
       1918. Southern Illinois U. Pr., 1995. 246 pp.
     * David B. Tyack. The One Best System: A History of American Urban
       Education (1974),
     * Tyack, David and Cuban, Larry. Tinkering toward Utopia: A Century
       of Public School Reform. Harvard U. Pr., 1995. 184 pp.
     * Tyack, David B., & Hansot, E. Managers of virtue: Public school
       leadership in America, 1820–1980. (1982).
     * Veysey Lawrence R. The emergence of the American university.
       (1965).

External links[edit]

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to Education in the United States.
   Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article
   Education in the United States.
     * EducationUSA: Your Guide to US Higher Education
     * National Center for Education Statistics
     * National Assessment of Educational Progress
     * Essay about public education paradigms on YouTube
     * Information on studying in the US
     * High School Grade Point Average Calculator - Standard grade point
       average calculator for US High Schools.
     * Information on education in United States, OECD - Contains
       indicators and information about United States and how it compares
       to other OECD and non-OECD countries
     * Diagram of American education system, OECD - Using 1997 ISCED
       classification of programmes and typical ages.


                  * v
     * t
     * e

   Education in North America
   Sovereign states
                      * Antigua and Barbuda
                      * Bahamas
                      * Barbados
                      * Belize
                      * Canada
                      * Costa Rica
                      * Cuba
                      * Dominica
                      * Dominican Republic
                      * El Salvador
                      * Grenada
                      * Guatemala
                      * Haiti
                      * Honduras
                      * Jamaica
                      * Mexico
                      * Nicaragua
                      * Panama
                      * Saint Kitts and Nevis
                      * Saint Lucia
                      * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
                      * Trinidad and Tobago
                      * United States

   Dependencies and
   other territories
                      * Anguilla
                      * Aruba
                      * Bermuda
                      * Bonaire
                      * British Virgin Islands
                      * Cayman Islands
                      * Curaçao
                      * Greenland
                      * Guadeloupe
                      * Martinique
                      * Montserrat
                      * Puerto Rico
                      * Saint Barthélemy
                      * Saint Martin
                      * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
                      * Saba
                      * Sint Eustatius
                      * Sint Maarten
                      * Turks and Caicos Islands
                      * United States Virgin Islands


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Education in the United States by political division
        States
                      * Alabama
                      * Alaska
                      * Arizona
                      * Arkansas
                      * California
                      * Colorado
                      * Connecticut
                      * Delaware
                      * Florida
                      * Georgia
                      * Hawaii
                      * Idaho
                      * Illinois
                      * Indiana
                      * Iowa
                      * Kansas
                      * Kentucky
                      * Louisiana
                      * Maine
                      * Maryland
                      * Massachusetts
                      * Michigan
                      * Minnesota
                      * Mississippi
                      * Missouri
                      * Montana
                      * Nebraska
                      * Nevada
                      * New Hampshire
                      * New Jersey
                      * New Mexico
                      * New York
                      * North Carolina
                      * North Dakota
                      * Ohio
                      * Oklahoma
                      * Oregon
                      * Pennsylvania
                      * Rhode Island
                      * South Carolina
                      * South Dakota
                      * Tennessee
                      * Texas
                      * Utah
                      * Vermont
                      * Virginia
                      * Washington
                      * West Virginia
                      * Wisconsin
                      * Wyoming

   Federal district
                    Washington, D.C.
    Insular areas
                      * American Samoa
                      * Guam
                      * Northern Mariana Islands
                      * Puerto Rico
                      * U.S. Virgin Islands


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Life in the United States
     * Affluence
     * Crime
     * Culture
     * Economic issues
     * Education (attainment)
     * Family structure
     * Health care
     * Health insurance
     * Holidays
     * Income (Household
     * Personal)
     * Income inequality
     * Homelessness
     * Homeownership
     * Human rights
     * Labor unions
     * Languages
     * Middle class
     * Passenger vehicle transport
     * Political ideologies
     * Poverty
     * Race
     * Religion
     * Social class
     * Society
     * Sports
     * Standard of living
     * Wealth


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Education_in_the_United_Stat
   es&oldid=625587959"
   Categories:
     * Education in the United States
     * Public education in the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2014
     * Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from September 2013
     * Articles with dead external links from September 2011
     * CS1 errors: dates
     * Articles with dead external links from April 2010
     * Articles with dead external links from October 2013
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2014
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012
     * All articles containing potentially dated statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010
     * Articles needing additional references from March 2011
     * All articles needing additional references
     * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011
     * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2008
     * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012
     * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011
     * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009
     * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009
     * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011
     * Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Azərbaycanca
     * Čeština
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 한국어
     * Italiano
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Português
     * Русский
     * සිංහල
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Svenska
     * Українська
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 14 September 2014 at 23:30.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
