   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Midwestern United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   "Midwest" redirects here. For other uses, see Midwest (disambiguation).
   The Midwest as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau.

   The Midwestern United States, or the Midwest, is one of the four U.S.
   geographic regions, as defined by the United States Census Bureau.^[1]
   Prior to June 1984 the area was named the North Central region by the
   census bureau.

   The region consists of 12 states in the north central United States:
   Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,
   Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. Illinois is
   the most populous of the states and North Dakota the least. A 2012
   report from the United States Census put the population of the Midwest
   at 65,377,684. The Midwest is divided by the Census Bureau into two
   divisions. The East North Central Division includes Illinois, Indiana,
   Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin, all of which are also part of the Great
   Lakes region. The West North Central Division includes Iowa, Kansas,
   Minnesota, Missouri, North Dakota, Nebraska, and South Dakota, all of
   which, except for Iowa, Missouri and Minnesota, are located, at least
   partly, within the Great Plains region of the country.

   Chicago is the largest city in the American Midwest and the third most
   populous in the entire country. Other large Midwest cities include (in
   order by population): Indianapolis, Columbus, Detroit, Milwaukee,
   Kansas City, Omaha, Minneapolis, Cleveland, Wichita and St. Louis.
   Chicago and its suburbs form the largest metropolitan statistical area
   with 9.8 million people, followed by Metro Detroit, Minneapolis–St.
   Paul, Greater St. Louis, Greater Cincinnati, Greater Cleveland, Kansas
   City metro area, and the Columbus metro area.^[2]

   Economically the region is balanced between heavy industry and
   agriculture, with finance and services such as medicine and education
   becoming increasingly important. Its central location makes it a
   transportation crossroads for river boats, railroads, autos, trucks and
   airplanes. Politically the region swings back and forth between the
   parties, and thus is heavily contested and often decisive in
   elections.^[3]^[4]

   The term Midwestern has been in use since the 1880s to refer to
   portions of the central U.S.^[5] A variant term, Middle West, has been
   used since the 19th century and remains relatively common.^[6]^[7]
   Another term sometimes applied to the same general region is the
   heartland.^[8] Other designations for the region have fallen out of
   use, such as the Northwest or Old Northwest (from "Northwest
   Territory") and Mid-America.

   For decades after the sociological study by Robert Lynd and Helen Lynd
   Middletown appeared in 1929, commentators used Midwestern cities (and
   the Midwest generally) as "typical" of the nation. Middletown was
   Muncie, Indiana.^[9] The region has a higher employment-to-population
   ratio (the percentage of employed people at least 16 years old) than
   the Northeast, the West, the South, or the Sun Belt states as of
   2011^[update].^[10]

Contents

     * 1 Definition
     * 2 Physical geography
     * 3 Prehistory
     * 4 History
          + 4.1 American Indian
               o 4.1.1 Great Lakes Indians
               o 4.1.2 Great Plains Indians
          + 4.2 European exploration and early settlement
               o 4.2.1 New France
               o 4.2.2 Marquette and Jolliet
          + 4.3 American colonization
               o 4.3.1 Louisiana Purchase
               o 4.3.2 Lewis and Clark
          + 4.4 Development of transportation
               o 4.4.1 Waterways
               o 4.4.2 Railroads and the automobile
          + 4.5 American Civil War
               o 4.5.1 Slavery prohibition and the Underground Railroad
               o 4.5.2 Bleeding Kansas
          + 4.6 Industrialization and immigration
               o 4.6.1 German Americans
          + 4.7 History of the term Midwest
     * 5 Farming and agriculture
     * 6 Culture
          + 6.1 Religion
          + 6.2 Music
          + 6.3 Cultural overlap
          + 6.4 Linguistic characteristics
     * 7 Major metropolitan areas
     * 8 Politics
          + 8.1 Historical
          + 8.2 Recent trends
          + 8.3 Iowa caucuses
     * 9 See also
     * 10 Notes
     * 11 Further reading
          + 11.1 Historiography
     * 12 Primary sources

Definition[edit]

   Traditional definitions of the Midwest include the Northwest Ordinance
   Old Northwest states and many states that were part of the Louisiana
   Purchase. The states of the Old Northwest are also known as Great Lakes
   states. Many of the Louisiana Purchase states are also known as Great
   Plains states.

   The Midwest Region is defined by the U.S. Census Bureau as these 12
   states:^[1]
     * Illinois: Old Northwest, Ohio River, and Great Lakes state.
     * Indiana: Old Northwest, Ohio River, and Great Lakes state.
     * Iowa: Louisiana Purchase.
     * Kansas: Louisiana Purchase, Great Plains state.
     * Michigan: Old Northwest and Great Lakes state.
     * Minnesota: Old Northwest, Louisiana Purchase, part of Red River
       Colony before 1818, Great Lakes state.
     * Missouri: Louisiana Purchase, Border state.
     * Nebraska: Louisiana Purchase, Great Plains state.
     * North Dakota: Louisiana Purchase, part of Red River Colony before
       1818, Great Plains state.
     * Ohio: Old Northwest (Historic Connecticut Western Reserve), Ohio
       River, and Great Lakes state. The southeastern part of the state is
       part of Southern Appalachia.
     * South Dakota: Louisiana Purchase, Great Plains state.
     * Wisconsin: Old Northwest and Great Lakes state.

   The Midwest Region of the National Park Service consists of these
   twelve states plus the state of Arkansas.

   The Council of State Governments, an organization for communication and
   coordination among state governments, includes in its Midwest regional
   office 11 states from the above list, omitting Missouri, which is in
   the CSG South region.^[11]

Physical geography[edit]

   Typical terrain of the Driftless Area as viewed from Wildcat Mountain
   State Park in Vernon County, Wisconsin
   Flint Hills grasslands of Kansas
   Theodore Roosevelt National Park, North Dakota
   Prairie in Effigy Mounds National Monument, Iowa.
   Corn fields in southern Nebraska

   The vast central area of the U.S., into Canada, is a landscape of low,
   flat to rolling terrain in the Interior Plains. Most of its eastern
   two-thirds form the Interior Lowlands. The Lowlands gradually rise
   westward, from a line passing through eastern Kansas, up to 5,000+ feet
   in the unit known as the Great Plains). Most of the Great Plains area
   is now farmed.^[12]

   While these states are for the most part relatively flat, consisting
   either of plains or of rolling and small hills, there is a measure of
   geographical variation. In particular, the eastern Midwest near the
   foothills of the Appalachian Mountains; the Great Lakes Basin; the
   Ozark Mountains of southern Missouri; the rugged topography of Southern
   Indiana and far Southern Illinois; and the Driftless Area of
   northwestern Illinois, southwestern Wisconsin, southeastern Minnesota,
   and northeastern Iowa exhibit a high degree of topographical variety.

   Proceeding westward, the Appalachian Plateau topography gradually gives
   way to gently rolling hills and then (in central Ohio) to flat lands
   converted principally to farms and urban areas. This is the beginning
   of the vast Interior Plains of North America. As a result, prairies
   cover most of the Great Plains states. Iowa and much of Illinois lie
   within an area called the prairie peninsula, an eastward extension of
   prairies that borders conifer and mixed forests to the north, and
   hardwood deciduous forests to the east and south.

   Geographers subdivide the Interior Plains into the Interior Lowlands
   and the Great Plains on the basis of elevation. The Lowlands are mostly
   below 1,500 feet above sea level whereas the Great Plains to the west
   are higher, rising in Colorado to around 5,000 feet.

   The Lowlands, then, are confined to parts of Minnesota, Iowa, Michigan,
   Ohio, Indiana, Tennessee, and Kentucky. Missouri and Arkansas have
   regions of Lowlands elevations but in the Ozarks (within the Interior
   Highlands) are higher. Those familiar with the topography of eastern
   Ohio may be confused by this; that region is hilly but its rocks are
   horizontal and are an extension of the Appalachian Plateau.

   The Interior Plains are largely coincident with the vast Mississippi
   River Drainage System (other major components are the Missouri and Ohio
   Rivers). These rivers have for tens of millions of years been eroding
   downward into the mostly horizontal sedimentary rocks of Paleozoic,
   Mesozoic, and Cenozoic ages. The modern Mississippi River system has
   developed during the Pleistocene Epoch of the Cenozoic.

   Rainfall decreases from east to west, resulting in different types of
   prairies, with the tallgrass prairie in the wetter eastern region,
   mixed-grass prairie in the central Great Plains, and shortgrass prairie
   towards the rain shadow of the Rockies. Today, these three prairie
   types largely correspond to the corn/soybean area, the wheat belt, and
   the western rangelands, respectively.

   Although hardwood forests in the northern Midwest were clear-cut in the
   late 19th century, they were replaced by new growth. Ohio and
   Michigan's forests are still growing. The majority of the Midwest can
   now be categorized as urbanized areas or pastoral agricultural areas.

Prehistory[edit]

   American Indians first came to North America through the Beringia land
   bridge between Asia and North America anywhere from 12,000 to 40,000
   years ago. Genetic and archeological evidence suggests that these
   peoples are most closely related to peoples now inhabiting Siberia.

   Prior to European colonization in North America, Native Americans had
   developed a large population in this vast land, estimated as between 1
   million to 18 million, scattered across all of North America. Many
   tribes belonged to several main cultures and societies. In Midwestern
   America, the American Indians had experienced three main periods before
   the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century.

   Paleoindian cultures were the earliest in North America, with some
   restricted to the Great Plains and Great Lakes of the modern United
   States and Canada, as well as adjacent areas to the west and southwest
   from about 12,000 BC to around 8,000 BC. These people moved into North
   America when the continental glaciers of the last great ice age, the
   Wisconsin glaciation, began to melt.

   Following the Paleo-Indian period is the Archaic period (8,000 BC to
   1,000 BC), the Woodland Tradition (1,000 BC to 100 AD), and the
   Mississippian Period (900 to 1500 AD). Archaeological evidence
   indicates that Mississippian culture traits probably began in the St.
   Louis, Missouri area and spread northwest along the Mississippi and
   Illinois rivers and entered the state along the Kankakee River system.
   It also spread northward into Indiana along the Wabash, Tippecanoe, and
   White Rivers.^[13] The Mississippians suffered a tremendous population
   decline about 1400, coinciding with the global climate change of the
   Little Ice Age.^[14]^[15]^[16]
   Monks Mound, located at the Cahokia Mounds UNESCO World Heritage Site
   near Collinsville, Illinois, is the largest Pre-Columbian earthwork in
   America north of Mesoamerica.

   The Mississippi period was characterized by a mound-building culture.
   The namesake cultural trait of the mound builders was their
   construction of large, truncated earthwork pyramid mounds, or platform
   mounds, and other earthworks. These burial and ceremonial structures
   were typically flat-topped pyramids or platform mounds, flat-topped or
   rounded cones, elongated ridges, and sometimes a variety of other
   forms. Domestic houses, temples, burial buildings were usually
   constructed on the tops of such mounds. Prehistoric mounds are common
   from the plains of the Midwest to the Atlantic seaboard, but only in
   this general area was there a culture that regularly constructed mounds
   in the shape of mammals, birds, or reptiles.

   Among the most well known are found at Effigy Mounds National Monument
   in northeastern Iowa, the largest known collection of mounds in the
   United States.^[17] The monument contains 2,526 acres (10.22 km^2) with
   206 mounds, of which 31 are effigies. The others are conical, linear
   and compound. Woodland period peoples built mounds from about 500 BC
   until the early European contact period. When the American prairies
   were plowed under by European settlers for agriculture, many mound
   sites were lost.

   They were built as part of complex villages that attracted more dense
   populations, with a specialization of skills and knowledge. The
   best-known, flat-topped pyramidal structure, which at over 100 feet
   (30 m) in height is the largest pre-Columbian earthwork north of
   Mexico, is Monks Mound at Cahokia near Collinsville, Illinois.

   The mound building cultures included many different tribal groups and
   chiefdoms, involving an array of beliefs and unique cultures over
   thousands of years. The general term covered their shared architectural
   practice of earthwork mound construction. This practice, believed to be
   associated with a cosmology that had a cross-cultural appeal, may
   indicate common cultural antecedents.

   Mississippian peoples in the Midwest were mostly farmers who followed
   the rich, flat floodplains of Midwestern rivers. They brought with them
   a well-developed agricultural complex based on three major crops—maize,
   beans, and squash. Maize, or corn, was the primary crop of
   Mississippian farmers. They gathered a wide variety of seeds, nuts, and
   berries, and fished and hunted for fowl to supplement their diets. With
   such an intensive form of agriculture, these culture supported large
   populations.

History[edit]

American Indian[edit]

Great Lakes Indians[edit]

   The Great Lakes region—stretching from New York to Minnesota—has played
   a vital role in the lives and histories of Native American peoples who
   have resided along their shores for millennia. Tribes living around the
   Great Lakes area included the Hurons, Ottawa, Chippewas or Ojibwas,
   Potawatomis, Winnebago (Ho-chunk), Menominees, Sacs, Neutrals, Fox, and
   the Miami. Most numerous were the Hurons and Chippewas. Fighting and
   battle were often launched between tribes, with some tribes forced to
   move around.

   Most Indian groups living in the Great Lakes region for the last five
   centuries are of the Algonquian language family. Some tribes—such as
   the Stockbridge-Munsee and the Brothertown—are also Algonkian-speaking
   tribes who relocated from the eastern seaboard to the Great Lakes
   region in the 19th century. The Oneida belong to the Iroquois language
   group and the Ho-Chunk of Wisconsin are one of the few Great Lakes
   tribes to speak a Siouan language.^[18] American Indians in this area
   did not develop a written form of language.
   Winnebago family (1852)

   In the 16th century, American Indians used projectiles and tools of
   stone, bone, and wood to hunt and farm. They made canoes for fishing.
   Most of them lived in oval or conical wigwams that could be easily
   moved away. Various tribes had different ways of living. The Ojibwas
   were primarily hunters and fishing was also important in the Ojibwas
   economy. Other tribes such as Sac, Fox, and Miami, who wandered in the
   south and southwestern section of the Great Lakes region, both hunted
   and farmed to make their living.

   They were oriented toward the open prairies where they engaged in
   communal hunts for buffalo. In the northern forests, the Ottawas and
   Potawatomis separated into small family groups for hunting. The
   Winnebagos and Menominees used both hunting methods interchangeably and
   built up widespread trade networks extending as far west as the
   Rockies, north to the Great Lakes, south to the Gulf of Mexico, and
   east to the Atlantic Ocean.

   The Hurons reckoned descent through the female line, while the others
   favored the patrilineal method. All tribes were governed under
   chiefdoms or complex chiefdoms. For example, Hurons were divided into
   matrilineal clans, each represented by a chief in the town council,
   where they met with a town chief on civic matters. But Chippewa
   people's social and political life was simpler than that of settled
   tribes.

   The religious beliefs varied among tribes. Hurons believed in Yoscaha,
   a supernatural being who lived in the sky and was believed to have
   created the world and the Huron people. At death, Hurons thought the
   soul left the body to live in a village in the sky. Chippewas were a
   deeply religious people who believed in the Great Spirit. They
   worshiped the Great Spirit through all their seasonal activities and
   viewed religion as a private matter: each person's relation with his
   personal guardian spirit was part of his thinking every day of life.
   Ottawa and Potawatomi people had very similar religious beliefs to
   those of the Chippewas.^[13]

Great Plains Indians[edit]

   Young Oglala Lakota girl in front of tipi with puppy beside her,
   probably on or near Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, South Dakota.

   The Plains Indians are the indigenous peoples who live on the plains
   and rolling hills of the Great Plains of North America. Their colorful
   equestrian culture and resistance to white domination have made the
   Plains Indians archetypical in literature and art for American Indians
   everywhere.

   Plains Indians are usually divided into two broad classifications, with
   some degree of overlap. The first group were fully nomadic, following
   the vast herds of buffalo. Some tribes occasionally engaged in
   agriculture; growing tobacco and corn primarily. These included the
   Blackfoot, Arapaho, Assiniboine, Cheyenne, Comanche, Crow, Gros Ventre,
   Kiowa, Lakota, Lipan, Plains Apache (or Kiowa Apache), Plains Cree,
   Plains Ojibwe, Sarsi, Shoshone, Stoney, and Tonkawa.

   The second group of Plains Indians (sometimes referred to as Prairie
   Indians) were the semi-sedentary tribes who, in addition to hunting
   buffalo, lived in villages and raised crops. These included the
   Arikara, Hidatsa, Iowa, Kaw (or Kansa), Kitsai, Mandan, Missouria, Nez
   Perce, Omaha, Osage, Otoe, Pawnee, Ponca, Quapaw, Santee, Wichita, and
   Yankton.

   The nomadic tribes of the Great Plains survived on hunting, some of
   their major hunts centered around deer and buffalo. Some tribes are
   described as part of the 'Buffalo Culture' (sometimes called, for the
   American Bison). Though the Plains Indians hunted other animals, such
   as elk or antelope, bison was their primary game food source. Bison
   flesh, hide and bones provided the chief source of raw materials for
   items that Plains Indians made, including food, cups, decorations,
   crafting tools, knives, and clothing. (See Bison hunting.)

   The tribes followed the bison's seasonal grazing and migration. The
   Plains Indians lived in teepees because they were easily disassembled
   and allowed the nomadic life of following game. When Spanish horses
   were obtained, the Plains tribes rapidly integrated them into their
   daily lives. By the early 18th century, many tribes had fully adopted a
   horse culture. Before their adoption of guns, the Plains Indians hunted
   with spears, bows, and bows and arrows, and various forms of clubs. The
   use of horses by the Plains Indians made hunting (and warfare) much
   easier.^[19]

   Among the most powerful and dominant tribes were the Dakota or Sioux,
   who occupied large amounts of territory in the Great Plains of the
   Midwest. The area of the Great Sioux Nation spread throughout the South
   and Midwest, up into the areas of Minnesota and stretching out west
   into the Rocky Mountains. At the same time, they occupied the heart of
   prime buffalo range, and also an excellent region for furs they could
   sell to French and American traders for goods such as guns. The Sioux
   (Dakota) became the most powerful of the Plains tribes and the greatest
   threat to American expansion.^[20]^[21]

   The Sioux comprise three major divisions based on Siouan dialect and
   subculture:
     * Isáŋyathi or Isáŋathi ("Knife," originating from the name of a lake
       in present-day Minnesota): residing in the extreme east of the
       Dakotas, Minnesota and northern Iowa, and are often referred to as
       the Santee or Eastern Dakota.
     * Iháŋktȟuŋwaŋ and Iháŋktȟuŋwaŋna ("Village-at-the-end" and "little
       village-at-the-end"): residing in the Minnesota River area, they
       are considered the middle Sioux, and are often referred to as the
       Yankton and the Yanktonai, or, collectively, as the Wičhíyena
       (endonym) or the Western Dakota (and have been erroneously
       classified as Nakota^[22]).
     * Thítȟuŋwaŋ or Teton (uncertain, perhaps "Dwellers on the Prairie";
       this name is archaic among the natives, who prefer to call
       themselves Lakȟóta^[23]): the westernmost Sioux, known for their
       hunting and warrior culture, are often referred to as the Lakota.

   The Plains Indians followed no single religion. Animist religion was an
   important part of a Great Plains Indians' life, as they believed that
   all things possessed spirits. Their worship was centered on one main
   god, in the Sioux language Wakan Tanka (the Great Spirit). The Great
   Spirit had power over everything that had ever existed, and the Plains
   Indians believed that by worshiping him they would become stronger.
   Earth was also quite important, as she was the mother of all spirits.
   Spirits were worshiped daily. People sometimes prayed alone, while
   other times there were group gatherings. The most important group
   ceremony was the Sun Dance, in which participants danced for four days
   around a sacred object, and some would inflict harm upon themselves on
   purpose, all while staring at the sun. They believed this
   self-sacrifice would encourage powerful spirits to support and defend
   them.

   Today, the Sioux maintain many separate tribal governments scattered
   across several reservations, communities, and reserves in the Dakotas,
   Nebraska, Minnesota, and Montana in the United States; and Manitoba and
   southern Saskatchewan in Canada.

European exploration and early settlement[edit]

New France[edit]

   European settlement of the area began in the 17th century following
   French exploration of the region and became known as New France, the
   area colonized by France in North America during a period beginning
   with the exploration of the Saint Lawrence River by Jacques Cartier in
   1534 and ending with the cession of New France to Spain and Great
   Britain in 1763.
   Map of North America (1750): Great Britain (pink and purple), France
   (blue), and Spain (orange).

   At its peak in 1712 (before the Treaty of Utrecht), the territory of
   New France extended from Newfoundland to the Rocky Mountains and from
   Hudson Bay to the Gulf of Mexico. The territory was then divided in
   five colonies, each with its own administration: Canada, Acadia, Hudson
   Bay, Newfoundland (Plaisance),^[24] and Louisiana.

   The Treaty of Utrecht resulted in the relinquishing of French claims to
   mainland Acadia, the Hudson Bay and Newfoundland colonies, and the
   establishment of the colony of Île Royale (Cape Breton Island) as the
   successor to Acadia.^[25]^[26]

Marquette and Jolliet[edit]

   c. 1681 map of Marquette and Jolliet's 1673 expedition

   Many governors of settlements and kings of nations hoped to be the
   first to find the Northwest Passage, a shortcut through the New World
   to the Indies of southeast Asia. The discovery of a Northwest Passage
   would result in great wealth for the founding nation because it would
   be able to directly import goods from the Asian markets while
   controlling the passage itself.

   In 1673, the governor of New France (Quebec, the French settlement
   started by Samuel de Champlain), sent Jacques Marquette, a Catholic
   priest and missionary, and Louis Jolliet, a French Canadian fur trader,
   along with seven other explorers, on a mission to find the Northwest
   Passage. The team began their trip in Quebec and traveled through
   Michigan's upper peninsula to the northern tip of Lake Michigan. On
   canoes, they crossed the massive lake and landed at present-day Green
   Bay, Wisconsin at the mouth of the Fox River. They met native American
   Indians who described various rivers they would encounter. After
   portaging their canoes to the Wisconsin River, they entered the
   Mississippi River on June 17, 1673.^[27]

   Marquette and Jolliet soon realized that the Mississippi couldn't
   possibly be the Northwest Passage they were hoping for because it
   flowed south. Nevertheless, the journey continued. They recorded much
   of the wildlife they encountered. They described the catfish as a
   monster with the head of a tiger, the nose of a wildcat, and with
   whiskers. They encountered herds of buffalo, which they described as
   cattle. The pair rowed south past the junction of the Mississippi River
   and the Missouri River at present day St. Louis, Missouri, and turned
   around at the junction of the Mississippi River and Arkansas River.
   They believed that the Mississippi River flowed into the Gulf of Mexico
   and were wary of being captured by Spaniards who controlled the area.

   The Marquette and Jolliet party returned to Illinois Territory in late
   1674, becoming the first Europeans to winter in what would become the
   city of Chicago. As welcomed guests of the Illinois Confederation, the
   explorers were feasted en route and fed ceremonial foods such as
   sagamite.^[28]

   Upon journey's end, Father Marquette and Louis Jolliet became the first
   Europeans to see and map the northern portion of the Mississippi River.
   Marquette and Jolliet did not discover the Mississippi. American
   Indians had been using it for thousands of years, and Spanish explorer
   Hernando de Soto had crossed it more than a century before them. They
   did confirm, however, that it was possible to travel easily from the
   Great Lakes all the way to the Gulf of Mexico by water, that the native
   peoples who lived along the route were generally friendly, and that the
   natural resources of the lands in between were extraordinary. Equipped
   with this information, French officials led by LaSalle would erect a
   4,000-mile network of trading posts to systematically exploit those
   riches over the next century and a half.^[29]

   During the next century, the French established a network of fur
   trading posts and Jesuit missions along the Mississippi River system
   and the upper Great Lakes.

American colonization[edit]

Louisiana Purchase[edit]

   Early beaver hunting grounds.

   French control over the area east of the Mississippi River ended in
   1763 with the conclusion of the French and Indian War. Colonists from
   the Thirteen Colonies began to expand into the Ohio Country during the
   1750s. The Royal Proclamation of 1763 temporarily restrained expansion
   west of the Appalachian Mountains, but did not stop it completely. West
   of the Mississippi River, French settlers flourished in towns such as
   St. Louis and Ste. Genevieve until the mid-18th century.

   France ceded the rest of New France to Great Britain and Spain at the
   Treaty of Paris, which ended the Seven Years' War (the French and
   Indian War). Britain received all lands east of the Mississippi River,
   including Canada, Acadia, and parts of Louisiana, while Spain received
   the territory to the west—the larger portion of Louisiana. Spain
   returned its portion of Louisiana to France in 1800, but French leader
   Napoleon Bonaparte sold it to the United States in the Louisiana
   Purchase of 1803, permanently ending French colonial efforts on the
   American mainland.

   American settlement began either via routes over the Appalachian
   Mountains, such as Braddock Road, or through the waterways of the Great
   Lakes. Fort Pitt (now Pittsburgh) at the source of the Ohio River was
   an early outpost of the overland routes. The first settlements in the
   Midwest via the waterways of the Great Lakes were centered around
   military forts and trading posts such as Green Bay, Sault Ste. Marie,
   and Detroit. The first inland settlements via the overland routes were
   in southern Ohio or northern Kentucky, on either side of the Ohio
   River, and early such pioneers included Daniel Boone and Spencer
   Records.

   The region's fertile soil made it possible for farmers to produce
   abundant harvests of cereal crops such as corn, oats, and, most
   importantly, wheat. The region soon became known as the nation's
   breadbasket.

Lewis and Clark[edit]

   In 1803, President Thomas Jefferson commissioned the Corps of
   Discovery, a specially-established unit of the United States Army which
   formed the nucleus of the Lewis and Clark expedition that took place
   between May 1804 and September 1806, and named as its leader his
   personal secretary and U.S. Army Captain, Meriwether Lewis, who
   selected William Clark as his partner.^[30] The goals of the Corps of
   Discovery, whose cadre would be raised primarily from the U.S.
   military, was to explore the Louisiana Purchase, and establish trade
   and U.S. sovereignty over the native peoples along the Missouri River.
   Jefferson also wanted to establish a U.S. claim to the Pacific
   Northwest and Oregon territory by documenting an American presence
   there before other Europeans, such as the British, could claim the
   land.^[31]^[32]^[33] The Corps' objectives were also scientific and
   commercial – to study the area's plants, animal life, and geography,
   and to learn how the Louisiana Purchase could be exploited
   economically.^[34]

   On May 14, 1804, the Corps of Discovery departed Camp Dubois, Illinois,
   then in the Indiana Territory, near St. Louis, and followed the
   Missouri River westward through what is now Kansas City, Missouri, and
   Omaha, Nebraska.
   Sergeant Floyd Monument, Sioux City, Iowa

   In August 1804, Sergeant Charles Floyd became the only member of the
   Lewis and Clark Expedition to die during the three-year long journey, a
   death believed to have been caused by an appendicitis attack. A
   100-foot high obelisk, located at the summit of Floyd's Bluff near what
   is now Sioux City, Iowa, marks the Floyd burial site and offers
   visitors a view of the Missouri River Valley. The Sergeant Floyd
   Monument was declared a U.S. National Historic Landmark in 1960, the
   first monument registered as such in the U.S.^[35]^[36]

   During the coming weeks, the expedition would reach the Great Plains.
   They would be among a select group of white people to see the area
   abounding with elk, deer, bison, and beaver before the large-scale
   encroachment of further European and American settlement.

   Over the next two years, the Lewis and Clark Expedition established
   relations with more than two dozen indigenous nations between the
   Missouri and the Pacific Ocean. Researchers now acknowledge that
   without such contact or help, the Corps of Discovery would have
   undoubtedly starved to death or become hopelessly lost in the Rocky
   Mountains.^[37]

   In the winter of 1804–05, the party built Fort Mandan, an encampment
   near present-day Washburn, North Dakota. Here they met a
   French-Canadian fur trapper named Toussaint Charbonneau and his young
   Lemhi Shoshone wife Sacagawea. Sacagawea was pregnant with her first
   child when the Corps of Discovery arrived near their Hidatsa villages
   to spend the winter. Following the birth of her first child, Jean
   Baptiste Charbonneau, on February 11, 1805, Sacagawea accompanied the
   expedition party on their journey west, acting as interpreter and
   guide.

   The expedition continued to journey along the Missouri to its
   headwaters and over the Continental Divide to reach the Pacific Ocean.
   Following a second bitter winter at Fort Clatsop, near what is now
   Astoria, Oregon, the Lewis and Clark Expedition returned east to St.
   Louis in the spring of 1806.

   The Corps met their objective of reaching the Pacific, mapping and
   establishing their presence for a legal claim to the land. With maps,
   sketches and journals in hand, the expedition returned to St. Louis in
   September 1806 to report their findings to Jefferson.^[34]

Development of transportation[edit]

Waterways[edit]

   Lake Michigan is shared by four Midwestern states: Michigan, Indiana,
   Illinois, and Wisconsin.

   Two waterways have been important to the development of the Midwest.
   The first and foremost was the Ohio River, which flowed into the
   Mississippi River. Development of the region was halted until 1795 due
   to Spain's control of the southern part of the Mississippi and its
   refusal to allow the shipment of American crops down the river and into
   the Atlantic Ocean.

   The second waterway is the network of routes within the Great Lakes.
   The opening of the Erie Canal in 1825 completed an all-water shipping
   route, more direct than the Mississippi, to New York and the seaport of
   New York City. In 1848, The Illinois and Michigan Canal breached the
   continental divide spanning the Chicago Portage and linking the waters
   of the Great Lakes with those of the Mississippi Valley and the Gulf of
   Mexico. Lakeport and river cities grew up to handle these new shipping
   routes. During the Industrial Revolution, the lakes became a conduit
   for iron ore from the Mesabi Range of Minnesota to steel mills in the
   Mid-Atlantic States. The Saint Lawrence Seaway (1862, widened 1959)
   opened the Midwest to the Atlantic Ocean.
   The Upper Mississippi River near Harpers Ferry, Iowa.

   In the 1870s and 1880s, the Mississippi River inspired two classic
   books—Life on the Mississippi and Adventures of Huckleberry
   Finn—written by native Missourian Samuel Clemens, who used the
   pseudonym Mark Twain. His stories became staples of Midwestern lore.
   Twain's hometown of Hannibal, Missouri is a tourist attraction offering
   a glimpse into the Midwest of his time.

   Inland canals in Ohio and Indiana constituted another important
   waterway, which connected with Great Lakes and Ohio River traffic. The
   commodities that the Midwest funneled into the Erie Canal down the Ohio
   River contributed to the wealth of New York City, which overtook Boston
   and Philadelphia.

Railroads and the automobile[edit]

   During the mid-19th century, the region got its first railroads, and
   the railroad junction in Chicago became the world's largest. Even
   today, a century after Henry Ford, six Class I railroads meet in
   Chicago.

   In the period from 1890 to 1930 many Midwestern cities, towns,
   villages, and even farms were connected by interurbans, or electrical
   streetcars. The Midwest had more interurbans than any other
   region.^[citation needed] In 1916, Ohio led all states with 2,798 miles
   (4,503 km), Indiana followed with 1,825 miles (2,937 km). These two
   states alone had almost a third of the country's interurban
   trackage.^[38] The nation's largest interurban junction was in
   Indianapolis. During the 1900s (decade) the city's 38% growth in
   population was attributed largely to the interurban.^[39]

   Competition with a growing population of automobiles and buses
   traveling on paved highways led to a decline in the interurban and
   other railroad passenger business. Henry Ford and Charles Kettering,
   the inventor of the electrical starting motor and leaded gasoline, were
   both products of the Midwest, as were the Wright Brothers.

American Civil War[edit]

Slavery prohibition and the Underground Railroad[edit]

   A map of various Underground Railroad routes.

   The Northwest Ordinance region, comprising the heart of the Midwest,
   was the first large region of the United States that prohibited slavery
   (the Northeastern United States emancipated slaves in the 1830s). The
   regional southern boundary was the Ohio River, the border of freedom
   and slavery in American history and literature (see Uncle Tom's Cabin
   by Harriet Beecher Stowe and Beloved by Toni Morrison).

   The Midwest, particularly Ohio, provided the primary routes for the
   Underground Railroad, whereby Midwesterners assisted slaves to freedom
   from their crossing of the Ohio River through their departure on Lake
   Erie to Canada. Created in the early 19th century, the Underground
   Railroad was at its height between 1850 and 1860. One estimate suggests
   that by 1850, 100,000 slaves had escaped via the Underground
   Railroad.^[40]

   The Underground Railroad consisted of meeting points, secret routes,
   transportation, and safe houses and assistance provided by abolitionist
   sympathizers. Individuals were often organized in small, independent
   groups; this helped to maintain secrecy because individuals knew some
   connecting "stations" along the route but knew few details of their
   immediate area. Escaped slaves would move north along the route from
   one way station to the next. Although the fugitives sometimes traveled
   on boat or train, they usually traveled on foot or by wagon.^[41]

   The region was shaped by the relative absence of slavery (except for
   Missouri), pioneer settlement, education in one-room free public
   schools, democratic notions brought by American Revolutionary War
   veterans, Protestant faiths and experimentation, and agricultural
   wealth transported on the Ohio River riverboats, flatboats, canal
   boats, and railroads.^[citation needed]

Bleeding Kansas[edit]

   The first violent conflicts leading up to the Civil War occurred
   between two neighboring Midwestern states, Kansas and Missouri,
   involving anti-slavery Free-Staters and pro-slavery "Border Ruffian"
   elements, that took place in the Kansas Territory and the western
   frontier towns of Missouri roughly between 1854 and 1858. At the heart
   of the conflict was the question of whether Kansas would enter the
   Union as a free state or slave state. As such, Bleeding Kansas was a
   proxy war between Northerners and Southerners over the issue of
   slavery. The term "Bleeding Kansas" was coined by Horace Greeley of the
   New York Tribune; the events it encompasses directly presaged the Civil
   War.
   1855 Free-State poster

   Setting in motion the events later known as "Bleeding Kansas" was the
   Kansas-Nebraska Act. The Act created the territories of Kansas and
   Nebraska, opened new lands that would help settlement in them, repealed
   the Missouri Compromise, and allowed settlers in those territories to
   determine through popular sovereignty whether to allow slavery within
   their boundaries. It was hoped the Act would ease relations between the
   North and the South, because the South could expand slavery to new
   territories but the North still had the right to abolish slavery in its
   states. Instead, opponents denounced the law as a concession to the
   slave power of the South.

   The new Republican Party, born in the Midwest (Ripon, Wisconsin, 1854)
   and created in opposition to the Act, aimed to stop the expansion of
   slavery and soon emerged as the dominant force throughout the
   North.^[42]

   An ostensibly democratic idea, popular sovereignty stated that the
   inhabitants of each territory or state should decide whether it would
   be a free or slave state; however, this resulted in immigration en
   masse to Kansas by activists from both sides. At one point, Kansas had
   two separate governments, each with its own constitution, although only
   one was federally recognized. On January 29, 1861, Kansas was admitted
   to the Union as a free state, less than three months before the Battle
   of Fort Sumter officially began the Civil War.^[43]

   The calm in Kansas was shattered in May 1856 by two events that are
   often regarded as the opening shots of the Civil War. On May 21, the
   Free Soil town of Lawrence, Kansas was sacked by an armed pro‐slavery
   force from Missouri. A few days later, the Sacking of Lawrence led
   abolitionist John Brown and six of his followers to execute five men
   along the Pottawatomie Creek in Franklin County, Kansas, in
   retaliation.^[44]

   The so-called "Border War" lasted for another four months, from May
   through October, between armed bands of pro‐slavery and Free Soil men.
   The U.S. Army had two garrisons in Kansas, the First Cavalry Regiment
   at Fort Leavenworth and the Second Dragoons and Sixth Infantry at Fort
   Riley.^[45] The skirmishes endured until a new governor, John W. Geary,
   managed to prevail upon the Missourians to return home in late 1856. A
   fragile peace followed, but violent outbreaks continued intermittently
   for several more years.

   National reaction to the events in Kansas demonstrated how deeply
   divided the country had become. The Border Ruffians were widely
   applauded in the South, even though their actions had cost the lives of
   numerous people. In the North, the murders committed by Brown and his
   followers were ignored by most and lauded by a few.^[46]

   The civil conflict in Kansas was a product of the political fight over
   slavery. Federal troops were not used to decide a political question,
   but they were used by successive territorial governors to pacify the
   territory so that the political question of slavery in Kansas could
   finally be decided by peaceful, legal, and political means.
   An animation depicting when United States territories and states
   forbade or allowed slavery, 1789–1861.

   The election of Abraham Lincoln in November 1860 was the final trigger
   for secession by the Southern states.^[47] Efforts at compromise,
   including the "Corwin Amendment" and the Crittenden Compromise, failed.
   Southern leaders feared that Lincoln would stop the expansion of
   slavery and put it on a course toward extinction.

   The U.S. federal government was supported by 20 mostly-Northern free
   states in which slavery already had been abolished, and by five slave
   states that became known as the border states. All of the Midwestern
   states but one, Missouri, banned slavery. Though most battles were
   fought in the South, skirmishes between Kansas and Missouri continued
   until culmination with the Lawrence Massacre on August 21, 1863. Also
   known as Quantrill's Raid, the massacre was a rebel guerrilla attack by
   Quantrill's Raiders, led by William Clarke Quantrill, on pro-Union
   Lawrence, Kansas.

   Lawrence was targeted due to the town's long support of abolition and
   its reputation as a center for Redlegs and Jayhawkers, which were
   free-state militia and vigilante groups known for attacking and
   destroying farms and plantations in Missouri's pro-slavery western
   counties.

   The Lawrence Massacre was one of the bloodiest events in the history of
   Kansas and the nation. Quantrill's band of 448 Missouri guerrillas
   raided and plundered Lawrence, killing more than 150 and burning all
   the business buildings and most of the dwellings. Pursued by federal
   troops, the band escaped to Missouri.^[48]

   General Robert E. Lee surrendered his Army of Northern Virginia on
   April 9, 1865, at the McLean House in the village of Appomattox Court
   House.^[49]

   On April 14, 1865, President Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth, a
   Southern sympathizer. Lincoln died early the next morning, and Andrew
   Johnson became president.

Industrialization and immigration[edit]

   The Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri

   By the time of the American Civil War, European immigrants bypassed the
   East Coast of the United States to settle directly in the interior:
   German immigrants to Ohio, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan, Illinois,
   and Missouri; Irish immigrants to port cities on the Great Lakes,
   especially Chicago; Danes, Swedes, and Norwegians to Iowa, Nebraska,
   Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas; and Finns to Upper Michigan and
   northern/central Minnesota. Poles, Hungarians, and Jews settled in
   Midwestern cities.

   The U.S. was predominantly rural at the time of the Civil War. The
   Midwest was no exception, dotted with small farms all across the
   region. The late 19th century saw industrialization, immigration, and
   urbanization that fed the Industrial Revolution, and the heart of
   industrial domination and innovation was in the Great Lakes states of
   the Midwest, which only began its slow decline by the late 20th
   century.

   In the 20th century, African American migration from the Southern
   United States into the Midwestern states changed Chicago, St. Louis,
   Cleveland, Milwaukee, Kansas City, Cincinnati, Detroit, Omaha,
   Minneapolis and many other cities in the Midwest, as factories and
   schools enticed families by the thousands to new opportunities. Chicago
   alone gained hundreds of thousands of black citizens from the Great
   Migration and the Second Great Migration.

   The Gateway Arch monument in St. Louis, clad in stainless steel and
   built in the form of a flattened catenary arch,^[50] is the tallest
   man-made monument in the United States,^[35] and the world's tallest
   arch.^[35] Built as a monument to the westward expansion of the United
   States,^[50] it is the centerpiece of the Jefferson National Expansion
   Memorial and has become an internationally famous symbol of St. Louis
   and the Midwest.

German Americans[edit]

   Distribution of German Americans according to the 2000 Census
   German population density in the United States, 1872
    German Immigration to United States (1820–2004)
   Region of
   Origin    Number of
             Immigrants Region of
                        Origin        Number of
                                  Immigrants
   1820–1840 160,335    1921–1930 412,202
   1841–1850 434,626    1931–1940            114,058
   1851–1860 951,667    1941–1950 226,578
   1861–1870 787,468    1951–1960 477,765
   1871–1880 718,182    1961–1970 190,796
   1881–1890 1,452,970  1971–1980 74,414
   1891–1900 505,152    1981–1990 91,961
   1901–1910 341,498    1991–2000 92,606
   1911–1920 143,945    2001–2004 61,253
                   Total : 7,237,594

   As the Midwest opened up to settlement via waterways and rail in the
   mid 1800s, Germans began to settle there in large numbers. The largest
   flow of German immigration to America occurred between 1820 and World
   War I, during which time nearly six million Germans immigrated to the
   United States. From 1840 to 1880, they were the largest group of
   immigrants.

   The Midwestern cities of Milwaukee, Cincinnati, St. Louis, Chicago, as
   well as the port cities of New York and Baltimore were favored
   destinations of German immigrants. The Northern Kentucky area along the
   Ohio River was also a popular destination. By 1900, the populations of
   the cities of Cleveland, Milwaukee, Hoboken, and Cincinnati were all
   more than 40% German American. Dubuque and Davenport, Iowa, had even
   larger proportions, as did Omaha, Nebraska, where the proportion of
   German Americans was 57 percent in 1910. In many other cities of the
   Midwest, such as Fort Wayne, Indiana, German Americans were at least 30
   percent of the population.^[51]^[52] Many concentrations acquired
   distinctive names suggesting their heritage, such as the
   "Over-the-Rhine" district in Cincinnati and "German Village" in
   Columbus, Ohio.^[53]

   A favorite destination was Milwaukee, known as "the German Athens".
   Radical Germans trained in politics in the old country dominated the
   city's Socialists. Skilled workers dominated many crafts, while
   entrepreneurs created the brewing industry; the most famous brands
   included Pabst, Schlitz, Miller, and Blatz.^[54]

   While half of German immigrants settled in cities, the other half
   established farms in the Midwest. From Ohio to the Plains states, a
   heavy presence persists in rural areas into the 21st century.^[55]^[56]
   Few Germans settled in the Deep South, apart from some in New
   Orleans.^[57]

   Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, German Americans showed a high
   interest in becoming farmers, and keeping their children and
   grandchildren on the land. Western railroads, with large land grants
   available to attract farmers, set up agencies in Hamburg and other
   German cities, promising cheap transportation, and sales of farmland on
   easy terms. For example, the Santa Fe railroad hired its own
   commissioner for immigration, and sold over 300,000 acres (1,200 km^2)
   to German-speaking farmers.^[58]

History of the term Midwest[edit]

   Scotts Bluff National Monument in western Nebraska

   The term West was applied to the region in the early years of the
   country. In 1789, the Northwest Ordinance was enacted, creating the
   Northwest Territory, which was bounded by the Great Lakes and the Ohio
   and Mississippi Rivers. Because the Northwest Territory lay between the
   East Coast and the then-far-West, the states carved out of it were
   called the Northwest. In the early 19th century, anything west of the
   Mississippi River was considered the West. The first recorded use of
   the term Midwestern to refer to a region of the central U.S. occurred
   in 1886, Midwest appeared in 1894, and Midwesterner in 1916.^[5]

   Following the settlement of the western prairie, some considered the
   row of states from North Dakota to Kansas to be part of the
   Midwest.^[59]

   The states of the "old Northwest" are now called the "East North
   Central States" by the United States Census Bureau and the "Great Lakes
   region" is also a popular term. The states just west of the Mississippi
   River and the Great Plains states are called the "West North Central
   States" by the Census Bureau. In some definitions, states such as
   Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana may be defined under Midwest as well.
   However, this definition is not in widespread use as those states are
   generally considered too far west to fall under the term "Midwest" as
   it is known.^[60]

   Some entities in the Midwest are still referred to as "Northwest" due
   to historical reasons, for example, Northwestern University in
   Illinois.

   The most common definition currently used colloquially is that the
   Midwest proper includes, for the most part, only the East North Central
   States of the Great Lakes region, specifically Ohio, Michigan, Indiana,
   Wisconsin, Illinois, and Minnesota, and in addition Iowa and Missouri
   are also usually understood to share the same regional
   characteristics.^[61]

Farming and agriculture[edit]

   A pastoral farm scene near Traverse City, Michigan, with a classic
   American red barn.
   A rural farm road in Champaign County, Illinois amidst corn fields.
   Farming covers a large area of the American Midwest.

   Agriculture is one of the biggest drivers of local economies in the
   Midwest, accounting for billions of dollars worth of exports and
   thousands of jobs. The area has some of the richest farming land in the
   world^[62] and is known for its corn and cattle. The extended area also
   includes soybean and wheat fields, particularly west of the Missouri
   River. In 2012, Missouri was 9th nationally for cotton production and
   4th in rice. Burley tobacco is cultivated and "air cured" along the
   central and western Missouri River.^[63]

   The very dense soil of the Midwest plagued the first settlers who were
   using wooden plows, which were more suitable for loose forest soil. On
   the prairie, the plows bounced around and the soil stuck to them. This
   problem was solved in 1837 by an Illinois blacksmith named John Deere
   who developed a steel moldboard plow that was stronger and cut the
   roots, making the fertile soils of the prairie ready for farming.

   The tallgrass prairie has been converted into one of the most intensive
   crop producing areas in North America. Less than one tenth of one
   percent (<0.09%) of the original landcover of the tallgrass prairie
   biome remains.^[64] States formerly with landcover in native tallgrass
   prairie such as Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Nebraska, and
   Missouri have become valued for their highly productive soils and are
   included in the Corn Belt. As an example of this land use intensity,
   Illinois and Iowa rank 49th and 50th out of 50 states in total
   uncultivated land remaining.

   The region's fertile soil combined with the steel plow has made it
   possible for farmers to produce abundant harvests of cereal crops, such
   as corn, wheat, and oats. The region was soon known as the nation's
   "breadbasket."^[65]

Culture[edit]

Religion[edit]

   Religiously, like most of the United States, the Midwest is
   predominantly Christian.^[66]

   Roman Catholicism is the largest religion in the midwest, varying
   between 18% and 34% of the state populations.^[67]^[68] Southern
   Baptists compose about 15% of Missouri's population^[69] and smaller
   percentages in other Midwestern states. Many mid-westerners are
   Protestant with rates from 48% in Illinois to 63% in Iowa.^[70]
   Lutherans are prevalent in the Upper Midwest, especially in Minnesota
   and the Dakotas with their large Scandinavian and German populations.

   Judaism is practiced by 2.5% and Islam is practiced by 1% or less of
   the population, with higher concentrations in major urban areas. People
   with no religious affiliation make up 13–16% of the Midwest's
   population. Surveys show 54% of Midwesterners regularly attend
   church.^[71]

Music[edit]

   The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland with Lake Erie in the
   foreground.

   Because of 20th century African American migration from the South, a
   large African-American urban population lives in most of the region's
   major cities, although the concentration is not generally as large as
   that of the Southern United States. The combination of industry and
   cultures, blues, and rock and roll led to an outpouring of musical
   creativity in the midwest during the post-Civil Rights movement years,
   including major contributions to jazz, funk, and R&B, and even new
   sub-genres such as the Motown Sound and techno from Detroit or house
   music from Chicago.

   Additionally, the electrified Chicago blues sound exemplifies the
   genre, as popularized by record labels Chess and Alligator and
   portrayed in such films as The Blues Brothers, Godfathers and Sons, and
   Adventures in Babysitting.

   Rock and roll music was first identified as a new genre in 1951 by
   Cleveland, Ohio, disc jockey Alan Freed who began playing this music
   style while popularizing the term "rock and roll" to describe it.^[72]
   By the mid-1950s, rock and roll emerged as a defined musical style in
   the United States, deriving most directly from the rhythm and blues
   music of the 1940s, which itself developed from earlier blues, boogie
   woogie, jazz, and swing music, and was also influenced by gospel,
   country and western, and traditional folk music. Freed's contribution
   in identifying rock as a new genre helped establish the Rock and Roll
   Hall of Fame to be located in Cleveland. Chuck Berry, a Midwesterner
   from St. Louis, was among the first successful rock and roll artists
   and influenced many other rock musicians.

   In the 1990s, the Midwest was at the center of the emo movement, with
   bands like The Get Up Kids (Kansas), Cursive (Nebraska) and Cap'n Jazz
   (Illinois) blending earlier hardcore punk sounds with a more melodic
   indie rock sentiment. This hybrid of styles came to be known as Midwest
   emo.

   Numerous classical composers live and have lived in midwestern states,
   including Easley Blackwood, Kenneth Gaburo, Salvatore Martirano, and
   Ralph Shapey (Illinois); Glenn Miller and Meredith Willson (Iowa);
   Leslie Bassett, William Bolcom, Michael Daugherty, and David Gillingham
   (Michigan); Donald Erb (Ohio); Dominick Argento and Stephen Paulus
   (Minnesota).

Cultural overlap[edit]

   This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (September 2011)
   Mount Rushmore is located in the Black Hills of South Dakota.
   The Milwaukee Art Museum is located on Lake Michigan.

   Differences in the definition of the Midwest mainly split between the
   Heartland and the Great Plains on one side, and the Great Lakes and the
   Rust Belt on the other. While some point to the small towns and
   agricultural communities in Kansas, Iowa, the Dakotas, and Nebraska of
   the Great Plains as representative of traditional Midwestern lifestyles
   and values, others assert that the Rust Belt cities of the Great
   Lakes—with their histories of 19th- and early-20th-century immigration,
   manufacturing base, and strong Catholic influence—are more
   representative of the Midwestern experience.

   Certain areas of the traditionally defined Midwest are often cited as
   not representative of the region, while other areas traditionally
   outside the Midwest are often described as part of the Midwest. These
   claims often embody historical, cultural, economic or demographic
   arguments for inclusion or exclusion. Perceptions of the proper
   classification of the Midwest also vary within the region, and tend
   toward exclusion rather than inclusion.

   Two other regions, Appalachia and the Ozark Mountains, overlap
   geographically with the Midwest—Appalachia in Southern Ohio and the
   Ozarks in Southern Missouri. The Ohio River has long been the boundary
   between North and South and between the Midwest and the Upper South.
   All of the lower Midwestern states, especially Missouri, have a major
   Southern component, and Missouri was a slave state before the Civil
   War.

   Western Pennsylvania, which contains the cities of Erie and Pittsburgh,
   plus the Western New York city of Buffalo, share history with the
   Midwest but overlap with Appalachia and the Northeast as well.^[73] In
   bordering Ontario, Canada, although there is a distinct culture
   separate to that of the Midwest, similarities do exist, a portion of
   the Corn Belt in the southwestern part and industrial, port cities on
   the Great Lakes centered around the auto manufacturing industry.

   Kentucky is rarely considered part of the Midwest, although it can be
   grouped with it in some contexts.^[74] It is categorized as Southern by
   the Census Bureau and is usually classified as such, especially from a
   cultural standpoint.^[75]^[76]

Linguistic characteristics[edit]

   This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)
   Main articles: Inland Northern American English, North Central American
   English, Yooper dialect and Midland American English

   The accents of the region are generally distinct from those of the
   South and of the urban areas of the American Northeast. To a lesser
   degree, they are also distinct from the accent of the American West.

   The accent characteristic of most of the Midwest is considered by many
   to be that of "standard" American English or General American. This
   accent is preferred by many national radio and television
   broadcasters.^[77]

   This may have started because many prominent broadcast
   personalities—such as Walter Cronkite, Harry Reasoner, Johnny Carson,
   David Letterman, Rush Limbaugh, Tom Brokaw, John Madden, and Casey
   Kasem—came from this region and so created this perception. A November
   1998 National Geographic article attributed the high number of
   telemarketing firms in Omaha to the "neutral accents" of the area's
   inhabitants. Currently, many cities in the Great Lakes region are
   undergoing the Northern cities vowel shift away from the standard
   pronunciation of vowels.^[78]

   The dialect of Minnesota, western Wisconsin, much of North Dakota and
   Michigan's Upper Peninsula is referred to as the Upper Midwestern
   Dialect (or "Minnesotan"), and has Scandinavian and Canadian^[citation
   needed] influences.

   Missouri has elements of three dialects, specifically: Northern
   Midland, in the extreme northern part of the state, with a distinctive
   variation in St. Louis and the surrounding area; Southern Midland, in
   the majority of the state; and Southern, in the southwestern and
   southeastern parts of the state, with a bulge extending north in the
   central part, to include approximately the southern one-third.^[79]

Major metropolitan areas[edit]

   All cities listed have a population of 250,000 or more.

   CAPTION: Cities

   Rank     City     State       Population
                           (2012 census estimate)
   1    Chicago      IL                 2,714,856
   2    Indianapolis IN                   836,609
   3    Columbus     OH                   809,798
   4    Detroit      MI                   701,475
   5    Milwaukee    WI                   598,816
   6    Kansas City  MO                   464,310
   7    Omaha        NE                   421,570
   8    Minneapolis  MN                   392,880
   9    Cleveland    OH                   390,928
   10   Wichita      KS                   385,577
   11   St. Louis    MO                   318,172
   12   Cincinnati   OH                   296,727
   13   St. Paul     MN                   290,770
   14   Toledo       OH                   284,012
   15   Lincoln      NE                   265,404
   16   Fort Wayne   IN                   254,555

   CAPTION: Urban Areas

   Rank  Urban area  State(s)  Population
                              (2010 census)
   1    Chicago      IL-IN-WI 8,608,208
   2    Detroit      MI       3,734,090
   3    Minneapolis-
        St. Paul     MN-WI    2,650,890
   4    St. Louis    MO-IL    2,150,706
   5    Cleveland    OH       1,780,673
   6    Cincinnati   OH-KY-IN 1,624,827
   7    Kansas City  MO-KS    1,519,417
   8    Indianapolis IN       1,487,483
   9    Milwaukee    WI       1,376,476
   10   Columbus     OH       1,368,035

   CAPTION: Metro Areas - CSA

   Rank  Metro area  State(s)       Population
                              (2012 census estimate)
   1    Chicago      IL-IN-WI 9,899,902
   2    Detroit      MI       5,311,449
   3    Minneapolis-
        St. Paul     MN-WI    3,759,978
   4    Cleveland    OH       3,497,711
   5    St. Louis    MO-IL    2,900,605
   6    Kansas City  MO-KS    2,376,631
   7    Columbus     OH       2,348,495
   8    Indianapolis IN       2,310,360
   9    Cincinnati   OH-KY-IN 2,188,001
   10   Milwaukee    WI       2,037,542

Politics[edit]

Historical[edit]

   The Midwest has been an important region in national elections, with
   highly contested elections in closely divided states often deciding the
   national result. In 1860–1920, both parties often selected either their
   president or vice president from the region.^[80]
   The first local meeting of the new Republican Party took place here in
   Ripon, Wisconsin on March 20, 1854

   One of the two major political parties in the United States, the
   Republican Party, originated in the Midwest in the 1850s; Ripon,
   Wisconsin had the first local meeting while Jackson, Michigan had the
   state county meeting of the new party. Its membership included many
   Yankees who had settled the upper Midwest. The party opposed the
   expansion of slavery and stressed the Protestant ideals of thrift, a
   hard work ethic, self-reliance, democratic decision making, and
   religious tolerance.^[81]

   In the early 1890s the wheat-growing regions were strongholds of the
   short-lived Populist movement in the Plains states.^[82]

   Starting in the 1890s the middle class urban Progressive movement
   became influential in the region (as it was in other regions), with
   Wisconsin a major center. Under the LaFolletes Wisconsin fought against
   the GOP bosses and for efficiency, modernization, and the use of
   experts to solve social, economic, and political problems. Theodore
   Roosevelt's 1912 Progressive Party had the best showing in this region;
   carrying the states of Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota. In 1924
   La Follette, Sr.'s 1924 Progressive Party did well in the region but
   only carried his home base of Wisconsin.

   The Midwest—especially the areas west of Chicago—has always been a
   stronghold of isolationism, a belief that America should not involve
   itself in foreign entanglements. This position was largely based on the
   many German American and Swedish-American communities. Isolationist
   leaders included the La Follettes, Ohio's Robert A. Taft, and Colonel
   Robert McCormick, publisher of the Chicago Tribune.^[83]^[84]

Recent trends[edit]

   The region is now home to many critical swing states that do not have
   strong allegiance to either the Democratic or Republican party. Upper
   Midwestern states, such as Illinois, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan
   tend to vote Democratic, but the 2010 elections proved they can
   sometimes swing to either party. Indiana is usually considered a
   Republican stronghold, however in 2008 the state voted for a Democratic
   presidential candidate, Barack Obama, for the first time in 44 years.

   As a result of the 2010 elections, Republicans now control the
   governors' office in nine of the twelve Midwestern states, leaving only
   Illinois, Minnesota, and Missouri in Democratic hands. Republicans also
   control every partisan state legislature in the Midwest, except
   Illinois, Minnesota and the Iowa Senate. (The unicameral Nebraska
   Legislature is officially nonpartisan.)

   The state government of Illinois is currently dominated by the
   Democratic Party. The state currently has one Republican senator, one
   Democratic senator, and an 12-6 Democratic majority House delegation.
   Illinois voters have preferred the Democratic presidential candidate by
   a significantly large margin in the past six elections (1992, 1996,
   2000, 2004, 2008, 2012).

   Many analysts consider Iowa the most evenly divided state in the
   country, but it has leaned Democratic for at least the past fifteen
   years. Iowa had a Democratic governor from 1999 until Terry Branstad
   was re-elected in the mid-term elections in 2010, has had both one
   Democratic and one Republican senator since the early 1980s, currently
   has evenly split (2-2) House delegation, and has voted for the
   Democratic presidential candidate in five out of the last six
   elections, (1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012). As a result of the 2010
   elections, Republicans hold a slight majority in the Iowa House of
   Representatives (53-47), while Democrats hold a majority in the Iowa
   Senate.

   Minnesota voters have chosen the Democratic candidate for president
   longer than any other state, having not voted Republican since 1972.
   Minnesota was the only U.S. state (along with Washington, D.C.) to vote
   for its native son Walter Mondale over Ronald Reagan in 1984. In Iowa
   and Minnesota, however, the recent Democratic victories have often been
   fairly narrow. Minnesota has elected and re-elected a Republican
   governor, as well as supported some of the strongest gun concealment
   laws in the nation. Republicans held control of both houses of the
   Minnesota state legislature from 2011 to 2013.

   Consistently, Ohio is a battleground state in presidential elections.
   No Republican has won the office without winning Ohio. This trend has
   contributed to Ohio's reputation as a quintessential swing state. At
   the state level, however, Republicans are currently dominant. With the
   exception of one justice of the Supreme Court of Ohio, all statewide
   elected officials are Republicans, and Republicans have a majority in
   the Ohio House of Representatives and a supermajority in the Ohio
   Senate. Ohio has one Democratic and one Republican U.S. Senator. As a
   result of the 2012 elections, 12 of Ohio's 16 members of the U.S. House
   of Representatives are Republicans.

   The Great Plains states of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and
   Kansas have been strongholds for the Republicans for many decades.
   These four states have gone for the Republican candidate in every
   presidential election since 1940, except for Lyndon B. Johnson's
   landslide over Barry Goldwater in 1964. Although North Dakota and South
   Dakota have often elected Democrats to Congress, after the 2012
   election both states' congressional delegations are majority
   Republican. Nebraska has elected Democrats to the Senate and as
   Governor in recent years, but the state's House delegation has been
   all-Republican since 1995 and both of its U.S. Senators are Republican.
   Kansas has elected a majority of Democrats as governor since 1956 but
   has not elected a Democrat to the Senate since 1932. Both of Kansas's
   U.S. Senators and all four of its U.S. House members are Republican.

   Missouri was historically considered a "bellwether state" in
   presidential elections. Prior to 2008, Missouri had supported the
   winning candidate all but once since the beginning of the 20th century.
   Only three times since 1904 has the Show-Me-State not voted for the
   winner in a presidential election: in 1956, when the state voted for
   Democrat Adlai Stevenson; in 2008, when the state broke for Republican
   John McCain; and in 2012, when it broke for Republican Mitt Romney.
   Missouri's House delegation has generally been evenly divided between
   Democrats and Republicans, with the Democrats holding sway in the large
   cities at the opposite ends of the state, Kansas City and St. Louis
   (although the Kansas City suburbs are now trending Republican), and the
   Republicans controlling the rest of the state, save for a pocket of
   Democratic strength in Columbia, home to the University of Missouri.
   However, as a result of the 2012 elections, Republicans now have a 6–2
   majority in the state's House delegation, with African-American
   Democrats representing the major cities. Missouri's Senate seats were
   mostly controlled by Democrats until the latter part of the 20th
   century, but the Republicans have held one or both Senate seats
   continuously since the 1976 elections.

Iowa caucuses[edit]

   Main article: Iowa Caucuses

   The Iowa caucuses are an electoral event in which residents of Iowa
   meet in precinct caucuses in all of the state's 1,784 precincts and
   elect delegates to the corresponding county conventions. There are 99
   counties in Iowa and thus 99 conventions. These county conventions then
   select delegates for both Iowa's Congressional District Convention and
   the State Convention, which eventually choose the delegates for the
   presidential nominating conventions (the national conventions). The
   most recent Iowa Caucuses were held on February 6, 2012.^[85]

   The caucuses are noteworthy for the amount of media attention they
   receive during U.S. presidential election years. Since 1972, the Iowa
   caucuses have been the first major electoral event of the nominating
   process for President of the United States. Although only about one
   percent of the nation's delegates are chosen by the Iowa State
   Convention, the Iowa caucuses have served as an early indication of
   which candidates for president might win the nomination of their
   political party at that party's national convention.

   The Iowa caucuses are commonly recognized as the first step in the U.S.
   presidential nomination process for both the Democratic and the
   Republican Parties.

See also[edit]

     * Cuisine of the Midwestern United States
     * Islands of the Midwest
     * Territories of the United States on stamps
     * Western Interior Seaway

Notes[edit]

    1. ^ ^a ^b Census Regions and Divisions of the United States U.S.
       Census Bureau
    2. ^ Population in Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas
       Ranked by 2000 Population for the United States and Puerto Rico:
       1990 and 2000 (pdf). U.S. Census Bureau. December 30, 2003.
       Retrieved on 2007-11-20 from
       http://www.census.gov/population/cen2000/phc-t29/tab03a.pdf.
    3. ^ Earl Black; Merle Black (2008). Divided America: The Ferocious
       Power Struggle in American Politics. Simon and Schuster. p. 209.
    4. ^ Richard J. Jensen (1971). The Winning of the Midwest: Social and
       Political Conflict, 1888–1896. U. Of Chicago Press. p. 15.
    5. ^ ^a ^b Oxford English Dictionary entries for Midwestern, Midwest,
       and Midwesterner, http://www.oed.com/
    6. ^ Examples of the use of Middle West include: Turner, Frederick
       Jackson (1921). The Frontier in American History. H. Holt and
       Company. OCLC 2127640.  Shortridge, James R. (1989). Middle West:
       Its Meaning in American Culture. University Press of Kansas.
       ISBN 978-0-7006-0475-3.  Bradway, Becky (2003). In the Middle of
       the Middle West: Literary Nonfiction from the Heartland. Indiana
       University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-21657-1.  and Gjerde, Jon (1999).
       The Minds of the West: Ethnocultural Evolution in the Rural Middle
       West, 1830–1917. UNC Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4807-4. ; among many
       others.
    7. ^ Library of Congress - Regions of the United States
    8. ^ Merriam-Webster online
    9. ^ Sisson (2006) pp. 69–73; Richard Jensen, "The Lynds Revisited,"
       Indiana Magazine of History (December 1979) 75: 303–319
   10. ^ "Bureau of Labor Statistics". Stats.bls.gov. 2010-03-04.
       Retrieved 2010-10-03.
   11. ^ "CSG Regional Offices". Council of State Governments. 2012.
       Retrieved February 13, 2014.
   12. ^ "Remote Sensing Tutorial, Section 6, online". Retrieved
       2011-06-09.
   13. ^ ^a ^b Midwestern Literature: Indian American Culture in the
       Midwest prior to the Arrival of Europeans. Retrieved 2011-6-17.
   14. ^ Pauketat, Timothy R. (2003). "Resettled Farmers and the Making of
       a Mississippian Polity". American Antiquity 68 (1).
   15. ^ Pauketat, Timothy R. (1998). "Refiguring the Archaeology of
       Greater Cahokia". Journal of Archaeological Research 6 (1).
   16. ^ Sullivan, Lynne P., Archaeology of the Appalachian Highlands,
       Univ. of Tennessee Press, 2001 ISBN 1-57233-142-9
   17. ^ Official National Park Service website: Retrieved 2011-6-24.
   18. ^ Great Lakes History: A General View Indian Country Wisconsin.
   19. ^ Hamalainen, Pekka (2008). The Comanche Empire. Yale University
       Press. pp. 37–38. ISBN 978-0-300-12654-9.
   20. ^ The Sioux Indians were a Great and Powerful Tribe. Native Net:
       Online.
   21. ^ Hamalainen, 20–21
   22. ^ For a report on the long-established blunder of misnaming as
       Nakota, the Yankton and the Yanktonai, see the article Nakota
   23. ^ Ullrich, Jan (2008). New Lakota Dictionary (Incorporating the
       Dakota Dialects of Yankton-Yanktonai and Santee-Sisseton). Lakota
       Language Consortium. pp. 1–2. ISBN 0-9761082-9-1.
   24. ^ "The French Settlement of Placentia: Newfoundland and Labrador
       Heritage". Heritage Canada. Retrieved 2010-06-30.
   25. ^ Control and Order in French Colonial Louisbourg, 1713–1758,
       Andrew John Bayly Johnston, 2001, MSU Press pp. 8–9 [1]
   26. ^ "Archaeology Program 2010". Fortressoflouisbourg.ca. Retrieved
       2010-06-30.
   27. ^ Mr. Nussbaum – Marquette and Jolliet online. Retrieved 2011-6-17.
   28. ^ Wisconsin Historical Society Archives online. Retrieved
       2011-6-17.
   29. ^ Wisconsin Historical Society –Marquette and Jolliet.
   30. ^ ''The Pacific Northwest: an interpretive history'', Carlos
       Schwantes, University of Nebraska Press, 1996, pg 55.
       Books.google.com. 1996-01-01. ISBN 978-0-8032-9228-4. Retrieved
       2011-01-20.
   31. ^ ''The encyclopedia of Louisville'' John Kleber, University Press
       of Kentucky, 2000, pg 509, 510. Books.google.com. 2001.
       ISBN 978-0-8131-2100-0. Retrieved 2011-01-20.
   32. ^ ''The Lewis and Clark Expedition'' Harry Fritz, pg 1, 5.
       Books.google.com. 2004. ISBN 978-0-313-31661-6. Retrieved
       2011-01-20.
   33. ^ Lewis & Clark among the Indians. University of Nebraska Press,
       1984, pg 32.
   34. ^ ^a ^b Elin Woodger, Brandon Toropov (2004). "Encyclopedia of the
       Lewis and Clark Expedition". Infobase Publishing. p.150. ISBN
       0-8160-4781-2
   35. ^ ^a ^b ^c "Sergeant Floyd Monument". National Historic Landmark
       summary listing. National Park Service. Retrieved 2013-08-28.
   36. ^ Stephen Lissandrello (July 2, 1975). National Register of
       Historic Places Inventory-Nomination: Sergeant Floyd Monument
       (PDF). National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-06-22. . Accompanying
       2 photos, from 1937 and 1964. PDF (352 KB)
   37. ^ Fritz, Harry W. (2004). The Lewis and Clark Expedition. Greenwood
       Publishing Group. p. 13. ISBN 0-313-31661-9.
   38. ^ "US History Encyclopedia: Interurban Railways". Answers.com.
       Retrieved 2010-10-03.
   39. ^ David P. Morgan (ed.): The Interurban Era, Kalmbach Publishing
       Co., pp. 16–17.
   40. ^ The Fugitive Slave Law African-American History, pp. 1–2.
       About.com
   41. ^ Bordewich, Fergus, 2005,p. 236
   42. ^ Springfield's 375th: From Puritans to presidents
   43. ^ Robert W. Johansson, Stephen A. Douglas (Oxford UP, 1973)
       pp 374–400
   44. ^ Africans in America Resource Bank: People and Events, 1853–1861,
       online. Retrieved June 14, 2011.
   45. ^ Gale Encyclopedia of U.S. History: Pottawatomie Massacre.
       Answers.com. Retrieved June 14, 2011
   46. ^ United States History – Bleeding Kansas online. Retrieved June
       14, 2011.
   47. ^ David Potter, The Impending Crisis, p. 485.
   48. ^ "Quantrill's Raid" Answers.com. Retrieved June 14, 2011.
   49. ^ William Marvel, Lee's Last Retreat: The Flight to Appomattox
       (2002) pp. 158–81
   50. ^ ^a ^b
       http://www.modernsteel.com/archives/PDFs_61-90/1963A9_3-4.pdf?bcsi_
       scan_955b0cd764557e80=0&bcsi_scan_filename=1963A9_3-4.pdf
   51. ^ Faust, Albert Bernhardt (1909), The German Element in the United
       States with Special Reference to Its Political, Moral, Social, and
       Educational Influence, Boston: Houghton-Mifflin
   52. ^ Census data from Bureau of the Census, Thirteenth census of the
       United States taken in the year 1910 (1913)
   53. ^ German Village Society, retrieved 19 November 2009
   54. ^ Trudy Knauss Paradis, et al. German Milwaukee (2006)
   55. ^ Conzen, Kathleen (1980), "Germans", in Stephan Thernstrom,
       Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups, Belknap Press,
       p. 407
   56. ^ Richard Sisson, ed. The American Midwest (2007), p. 208; Gross
       (1996); Johnson (1951).
   57. ^ German Settlers in Louisiana and New Orleans, retrieved
       2007-11-30
   58. ^ C. B. Schmidt, "Reminiscences of Foreign Immigration Work for
       Kansas," Kansas Historical Collections, 1905–1906 9 (1906): 485–97;
       J. Neale Carman, ed. and trans., "German Settlements Along the
       Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway," Kansas Historical Quarterly
       28 (Autumn 1962): 310–16; cited in Turk, "Germans in Kansas,"
       (2005) p 57.
   59. ^ Regional Song Sampler: The Midwest. Library of Congress.
       Retrieved January 5, 2014
   60. ^ Sisson (2006) pp. 57–60
   61. ^ Midwest Tourism Association. Retrieved on 2012-09-08 from
       http://www.travelthemidwest.com/.
   62. ^ Greyson S. Colvin, T. Marc Schober: Investors' Guide to Farmland
       (2012) ISBN 978-1-4752-5845-5, p. 25
   63. ^ [2] University of Missouri Extension, Missouri Crop Resource
       Guide. [3]
   64. ^ Carl Kurtz. Iowa's Wild Places: An Exploration With Carl Kurtz
       (Iowa Heritage Collection) Iowa State Press; 1st edition (July 30,
       1996)
   65. ^ The U.S. Department of State Fact Monster. Retrieved 2011-6-2.
   66. ^ Sisson R., Zacher C.K., Cayton A.R.L. (2006.) The American
       Midwest: An Interpretic Encyclopedia, Indiana University Press, pg.
       705.
   67. ^ Philip Barlow and Mark Silk, Religion and public life in the
       midwest: America's common denominator? (2004)
   68. ^ "American Religious Identification Survey 2001" (PDF). The
       Graduate Center of the City University of New York. Retrieved
       January 4, 2012.
   69. ^ "Southern Baptist Convention statistics". Adherents.com.
       Retrieved 2010-10-03.
   70. ^ Jeffrey M. Jones (June 22, 2004). "Tracking Religious
       Affiliation, State by State". Gallup, Inc. Retrieved February 28,
       2013.
   71. ^ See Barna Research, "Church Attendance" at the Wayback Machine
       (archived July 16, 2008)
   72. ^ Bordowitz, Hank (2004). Turning Points in Rock and Roll. New
       York, New York: Citadel Press. p. 63. ISBN 978-0-8065-2631-7.
   73. ^ Defining the Midwest Megaregion
   74. ^ The North American Midwest: A Regional Geography. New York City:
       Wiley Publishers. 1955.
   75. ^ "Welcome to Travel South USA". Travelsouthusa.org. Retrieved
       2010-10-03.
   76. ^ "Encyclopedia – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Britannica.com.
       Retrieved 2010-10-03.
   77. ^ Gewertz, Ken (12 December 2002). "Standing on line at the bubbler
       with a hoagie in my hand". Harvard Gazette. Retrieved 11 August
       2010.
   78. ^ "Northern Cities Shift". Ic.arizona.edu. Retrieved 2010-10-03.
   79. ^ Lavov, William, et alia. "A National Map of the Regional Dialects
       of American English". Linguistics Laboratory, Department of
       Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved September 18,
       2013.
   80. ^ Gould, Lewis L. (2012). Grand Old Party: A History of the
       Republicans (2nd ed.). p. 126.
   81. ^ Gould (2012). Grand Old Party: A History of the Republicans (2nd
       ed.). p. 14.
   82. ^ Nye, Russel B. (1968). Midwestern Progressive Politics.
   83. ^ Smuckler, Ralph H. (1953). "The Region of Isolationism". American
       Political Science Review 47 (2): 386–401. JSTOR 1952029.
   84. ^ Schacht, John N. (1981). Three Faces of Midwestern Isolationism:
       Gerald P. Nye, Robert E. Wood, John L. Lewis. ISBN 0-87414-019-6.
   85. ^ 2012 Primary Calendar: Early States Edition | Race 4 2016.
       Race42012.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

Further reading[edit]

     * Aley, Ginette et al. eds. Union Heartland: The Midwestern Home
       Front during the Civil War (2013)
     * Barlow, Philip, and Mark Silk. Religion and Public Life in the
       Midwest: America's Common Denominator? (2004)
     * Buley, R. Carlyle. The Old Northwest: Pioneer Period 1815–1840 2
       vol (1951), Pulitzer Prize
     * Cayton, Andrew R. L. Midwest and the Nation (1990)
     * Cayton, Andrew R. L. and Susan E. Gray, Eds. The Identity of the
       American Midwest: Essays on Regional History. (2001)
     * Cronon, William. Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West
       (1992), 1850–1900 excerpt and text search
     * Garland, John H. The North American Midwest: A Regional Geography
       (1955)
     * Gjerde, John. Minds of the West: Ethnocultural Evolution in the
       Rural Middle West, 1830–1917 (1999) excerpt and text search
     * Jensen, Richard. The Winning of the Midwest: Social and Political
       Conflict, 1888–1896 (1971) online free
     * Meyer, David R. "Midwestern Industrialization and the American
       Manufacturing Belt in the Nineteenth Century", The Journal of
       Economic History, Vol. 49, No. 4 (December, 1989) pp. 921–937.in
       JSTOR
     * Nordin, Dennis S., and Roy V. Scott. From Prairie Farmer to
       Entrepreneur: The Transformation of Midwestern Agriculture. (2005)
       356pp.
     * Shannon, Fred A. "The Status of the Midwestern Farmer in 1900" The
       Mississippi Valley Historical Review. Vol. 37, No. 3. (December
       1950), pp. 491–510. in JSTOR
     * Sisson, Richard, Christian Zacher, and Andrew Cayton, eds. The
       American Midwest: An Interpretive Encyclopedia (Indiana University
       Press, 2006), 1916 pp of articles by scholars on all topics
       covering the 12 states; ISBN 0-253-34886-2 ISBN 978-0-253-34886-9
     * Slade, Joseph W. and Judith Lee. The Midwest: The Greenwood
       Encyclopedia of American Regional Cultures (2004)
     * Wuthnow, Robert. Remaking the Heartland: Middle America Since the
       1950s (Princeton University Press; 2011) 358 pages

Historiography[edit]

     * Brown, David S. Beyond the Frontier: The Midwestern Voice in
       American Historical Writing (2009)
     * Lauck, Jon K. The Lost Region: Toward a Revival of Midwestern
       History (University of Iowa Press; 2013) 166 pages; criticizes the
       neglect of the Midwest in contemporary historiography and argues
       for a revival of attention

Primary sources[edit]

     * Frederick; John T., ed. Out of the Midwest: A Collection of
       Present-Day Writing (1944) literary excerpts online edition


                 * v
     * t
     * e

   Regions of the United States
   Administrative
   (political)

                   Units
                              * U.S. state
                              * District of Columbia
                              * Insular area
                              * Minor Outlying Island
                              * Maritime territory

                 Time zones
                              * Hawaii–Aleutian
                              * Alaska
                              * Pacific
                              * Mountain
                              * Central
                              * Eastern

                   Census
                              * West
                                   + Pacific
                                   + Mountain
                              * Midwest
                                   + E N Central
                                   + W N Central
                              * Northeast
                                   + New England
                                   + Middle Atlantic
                              * South
                                   + S Atlantic
                                   + E S Central
                                   + W S Central

                 Courts of
                 appeals
                              * 1st
                              * 2nd
                              * 3rd
                              * 4th
                              * 5th
                              * 6th
                              * 7th
                              * 8th
                              * 9th
                              * 10th
                              * 11th

      Physical

                 Physiographic
                                 * Pacific Mountain
                                 * Intermontane Plateaus
                                 * Rocky Mountain
                                 * Superior Upland
                                 * Interior Plains
                                 * Interior Highlands
                                 * Appalachian
                                 * Atlantic Plain

                    Coastal
                                 * Arctic
                                 * West
                                 * Great Lakes
                                 * Gulf
                                 * East

     Historical

                 Cessions and
                 accessions
                               * 13 Colonies
                               * Louisiana Purchase
                               * Gadsden Purchase
                               * Texas Annexation
                               * Oregon Treaty
                               * Mexican Cession
                               * Alaska Purchase
                               * Newlands Resolution

                  Civil War
                               * Union
                                    + Border states
                               * Confederacy
                                    + Old South
                                    + Dixie
                                    + Slave states

                             Theaters
                                    Pacific
                                    Western
                                    Trans-Mississippi
                                    Lower Seaboard
                                    Eastern

      Divided
                   * Pacific Northwest
                   * Atlantic Northeast
                   * Prairie Pothole
                   * Columbia
                   * Oregon

       Other
                   * Appalachia
                   * Central
                   * Four Corners
                   * Great Plains
                   * High Plains
                   * Intermountain
                   * Interior
                   * Northwest Territory
                   * South Central
                   * Southern
                        + Deep
                        + New
                        + Upland
                   * Southeast
                   * Southwest

     * List
     * Category


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Midwestern_United_States&old
   id=625683556"
   Categories:
     * Midwestern United States
     * Regions of the United States
     * Census regions of the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011
     * All articles containing potentially dated statements
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010
     * Articles with unsourced statements from September 2008
     * Articles needing additional references from September 2011
     * All articles needing additional references
     * Articles needing additional references from September 2008
     * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * বাংলা
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Bosanski
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * Galego
     * 한국어
     * Hrvatski
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Sardu
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * Татарча/tatarça
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 15 September 2014 at 16:37.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
