   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Racism in the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Unbalanced scales.svg
   The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be
   found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the
   dispute is resolved. (March 2014)
                     Part of a series of articles on
   Racial segregation
   1943 Colored Waiting Room Sign.jpg
                                Australia
   White Australia policy, Freedom Ride (Australia)
                              South Africa
   Bantustan, Group Areas Acts, Bantu Education Act, Namibia
                              United States
     * Black Codes
     * Blockbusting
     * Chinese Exclusion Act
     * Immigration Act of 1924
     * Indian Appropriations
     * Indian Removal Act
     * Japanese American internment
     * Jim Crow laws
     * Proposition 14
     * Racial steering
     * Redlining
     * School segregation
          + segregation academy
     * Separate but equal
     * Sundown town

                                Elsewhere
   Arab world, Ireland, Israel, Latin America, Rhodesia, United Kingdom
     * v
     * t
     * e

   Racism and ethnic discrimination in the United States has been a major
   issue since the colonial era and the slave era. Legally sanctioned
   racism sanctioned privileges and rights for White Americans not granted
   to Native Americans, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latin
   Americans. European Americans (particularly Anglo Americans) were
   privileged by law in matters of education, immigration, voting rights,
   citizenship, land acquisition, and criminal procedure over periods of
   time extending from the 17th century to the 1960s. At the time, many
   non-Protestant groups immigrating from Europe - particularly Jews,
   Irish people, Poles and Italians - suffered xenophobic exclusion and
   other forms of ethnicity-based discrimination in the American society.

   Major racially and ethnically structured institutions included slavery,
   Indian Wars, Native American reservations, segregation, residential
   schools for Native Americans, and internment camps.^[1] Formal racial
   discrimination was largely banned in the mid-20th century, and came to
   be perceived as socially unacceptable and/or morally repugnant as well.

   Racial politics remains a major phenomenon. Racism continues to be
   reflected in socioeconomic inequality,^[2] and has taken on more
   modern, indirect forms of expression, most prevalently symbolic
   racism.^[3] Racial stratification continues to occur in employment,
   housing, education, lending, and government.

   In the view of the U.S. Human Rights Network, a network of scores of US
   civil rights and human rights organizations, "Discrimination permeates
   all aspects of life in the United States, and extends to all
   communities of color".^[4]

Contents

     * 1 Historical context
          + 1.1 African Americans
               o 1.1.1 Pre-Civil War
               o 1.1.2 Reconstruction Era to WWII
               o 1.1.3 WWII to Civil Rights Era
               o 1.1.4 Present
          + 1.2 Asian Americans
          + 1.3 European immigrants
          + 1.4 Latin Americans
          + 1.5 Middle Eastern and South Asian Americans
               o 1.5.1 Arab Americans
               o 1.5.2 Iranian Americans
               o 1.5.3 Antisemitism
                    # 1.5.3.1 New antisemitism
               o 1.5.4 Antiziganism
          + 1.6 Native Americans
               o 1.6.1 Reservation marginalization
               o 1.6.2 Assimilation
     * 2 Consequences
          + 2.1 Developmental
          + 2.2 Societal
               o 2.2.1 Schemas and stereotypes
               o 2.2.2 Formal discrimination
               o 2.2.3 Interpersonal discrimination
          + 2.3 Institutional
               o 2.3.1 Immigration
               o 2.3.2 Wealth
               o 2.3.3 Health care
               o 2.3.4 Politics
               o 2.3.5 Justice system
     * 3 Contemporary issues in American racism
          + 3.1 Hate crimes
          + 3.2 Hateful views from Americans
     * 4 Alleviation
     * 5 See also
     * 6 References

Historical context[edit]

African Americans[edit]

   Main article: African American history

Pre-Civil War[edit]

   Atlantic Slave Trade

   While the existence of slavery is arguably the root of subsequent
   conceptualizations of African-Americans, it is the origins of African
   enslavement have a large economic foundation. Among the European elite
   who structured national policy throughout the age of the Atlantic
   system of trade, there existed a popular ideology called mercantilism,
   or the belief that policy pursuits were centralized around military
   power and economic wealth. They attributed the value of colonial
   possessions, as a source of mineral wealth and raw materials and as a
   means of exporting products to the home country.^[5] The population of
   Native Americans as labor proved too exceedingly reduced, after
   decimation through disease and violence. The use of voluntary European
   peoples as labor also proved unsustainably expensive and detrimental to
   domestic labor and competitiveness. Unlike the previous populations,
   Africans were "available in large numbers at prices that made
   plantation agriculture in the Americas profitable"^[6]

   It is also argued that, along with the economic motives underlying
   slavery in the Americas, European world schemas played a large role in
   the enslavement of Africans. According to this view, the European
   in-group for humane behavior included the sub-continent, while African
   and American Indian cultures had a more localized definition of "an
   insider". While neither schema has inherent superiority, the
   technological advantage of Europeans became a resource to disseminate
   the conviction that underscored their schemas, that non-Europeans could
   be enslaved. With the capability to spread their schematic
   representation of the world, Europeans could impose a social contract,
   morally permitting three centuries of African slavery. While the
   disintegration of this social contract by the eighteenth century led to
   the abolition of slavery, it is argued that the removal of barriers to
   "insider status" is a very slow, and presently continued, process.^[7]

   As a result of these debated elements, the Atlantic slave trade arose.
   According to the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database, between 1626 and
   1850, an estimated total of 305,326 slaves were forcibly transported
   via U.S. vessels to the Americas.^[8]^[9] Furthermore, approximately
   one Southern family in four held slaves prior to war. According to the
   1860 U.S. census, there were about 385,000 slaveowners out of
   approximately 1.5 million white families.^[10]

   Efforts toward Abolition

   In the early part of the 19th century, a variety of organizations were
   established advocating the movement of black people from the United
   States to locations where they would enjoy greater freedom; some
   endorsed colonization, while others advocated emigration. During the
   1820s and 1830s the American Colonization Society (A.C.S.) was the
   primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to greater
   freedom and equality in Africa,^[11] and in 1821 the A.C.S. established
   the colony of Liberia, assisting thousands of former African-American
   slaves and free black people (with legislated limits) to move there
   from the United States. The colonization effort resulted from a mixture
   of motives with its founder Henry Clay stating; "unconquerable
   prejudice resulting from their color, they never could amalgamate with
   the free whites of this country. It was desirable, therefore, as it
   respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to
   drain them off".^[12]

   Although the Constitution had banned the importation of new African
   slaves in 1808, and in 1820 slave trade was equated with piracy,
   punishable by death,^[13] the practice of chattel slavery still existed
   for the next half century. All slaves in only the areas of the
   Confederate States of America that were not under direct control of the
   United States government were declared free by the Emancipation
   Proclamation, which was issued on January 1, 1863, by President Abraham
   Lincoln.^[14] It should be noted that the Emancipation Proclamation did
   not apply to areas loyal to, or controlled by, the Union, thus the
   document only freed slaves where the Union still had not regained the
   legitimacy to claim freedom. Slavery was not actually abolished in the
   United States until the passage of the 13th Amendment which was
   declared ratified on December 6, 1865.^[15]

   About 4 million black slaves were freed in 1865. Ninety-five percent of
   blacks lived in the South, comprising one third of the population there
   as opposed to one percent of the population of the North. Consequently,
   fears of eventual emancipation were much greater in the South than in
   the North.^[16] Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males
   aged 13 to 43 died in the civil war, including 6% in the North and an
   extraordinary 18% in the South.^[17]

Reconstruction Era to WWII[edit]

   Main articles: Nadir of American race relations and Mass racial
   violence in the United States
   The mob-style lynching of Will James, Cairo, Illinois, 1909.

   Reconstruction Era

   After the Civil War, the 13th amendment in 1865, formally abolishing
   slavery, was ratified. Furthermore, Congress passed the Civil Rights
   Act of 1866, which broadened a range of civil rights to all persons
   born in the United States. Despite this, the emergence of "Black
   Codes", sanctioned acts of subjugation against blacks, continued to bar
   African-Americans from due civil rights. The 14th amendment was
   ratified in 1868 to underscore this effort, and the Civil Rights Act of
   1875 followed. The latter was eliminated, in a decision that undermined
   federal power to thwart private racial discrimination.^[18]
   Nonetheless, the last of the Reconstruction Era amendments, the 15th
   amendment promised voting rights to African-American men, and these
   cumulative federal efforts, African-Americans began taking advantage of
   enfranchisement. African-Americans began voting, seeking office
   positions, utilizing public education. Yet by the end of Reconstruction
   in the mid 1870s, violent white supremacists came to power via
   paramilitary groups such as the Red Shirts and the White League and
   imposed Jim Crow laws that deprived African-American of voting rights
   and instituted systemic discriminatory policies through policies of
   unequal racial segregation^[19]

   Post-Reconstruction

   The new century saw a hardening of institutionalized racism and legal
   discrimination against citizens of African descent in the United
   States. Throughout this post Civil War period, racial stratification
   was informally and systemically enforced, to solidify pre-existing
   social order. Although technically able to vote, poll taxes, pervasive
   acts of terror such as lynching in the United States (often perpetrated
   by groups such as the reborn Ku Klux Klan, founded in the
   Reconstruction South), and discriminatory laws such as grandfather
   clauses kept black Americans disenfranchised particularly in the South.
   Furthermore, discrimination extended to state legislation that
   "allocated vastly unequal financial support" for black and white
   schools. In addition to this, county officials sometimes redistributed
   resources earmarked for blacks to white schools, further undermining
   educational opportunities.^[20] In response to de jure racism, protest
   and lobbyist groups emerged, most notably, the NAACP (National
   Association for the Advancement of Colored People) in 1909.

   This time period is sometimes referred to as the nadir of American race
   relations because racism, segregation, racial discrimination, and
   expressions of white supremacy all increased. So did anti-black
   violence, including race riots such as the Atlanta Race Riot of 1906
   and the Tulsa race riot of 1921.

   The Great Migration

   In addition, racism which had been viewed primarily as a problem in the
   Southern states, burst onto the national consciousness following the
   Great Migration, the relocation of millions of African Americans from
   their roots in the Southern states to the industrial centers of the
   North after World War I, particularly in cities such as Boston,
   Chicago, and New York (Harlem). Within Chicago, for example, between
   1910 and 1970, the percentage of African-Americans leapt from 2.0
   percent to 32.7 percent.^[21] The demographic patterns of black
   migrants and external economic conditions are largely studied
   stimulants regarding the Great Migration.^[22] For example, migrating
   blacks (between 1910 and 1920) were more likely to be literate than
   blacks that remained in the South. Known economic push factors played a
   role in migration, such as the emergence of a split labor market and
   agricultural distress from the boll weevil destruction of cotton
   economy.^[23]

   Southern migrants were often treated in alliance with pre-existing
   racial stratification. The rapid influx of blacks disturbed the racial
   balance within cities, exacerbating hostility from both black and white
   Northerners. Stereotypic schemas of Southern blacks were used to
   attribute issues in urban areas, such as crime and disease, to the
   presence of African-Americans. Overall, African-Americans in Northern
   cities experienced systemic discrimination in a plethora of aspects of
   life. Within employment, economic opportunities for blacks were routed
   to the lowest-status and restrictive in potential mobility . Within the
   housing market, stronger discriminatory measures were used in
   correlation to the influx, resulting in a mix of "targeted violence,
   restrictive covenants, redlining and racial steering"^[24]

   Throughout this period, racial tensions exploded, most violently in
   Chicago, and lynchings—mob-directed hangings, usually racially
   motivated—increased dramatically in the 1920s.

WWII to Civil Rights Era[edit]

   The Jim Crow Laws were state and local laws enacted in the Southern and
   border states of the United States and enforced between 1876 and 1965.
   They mandated "separate but equal" status for black Americans. In
   reality, this led to treatment and accommodations that were almost
   always inferior to those provided to white Americans. The most
   important laws required that public schools, public places and public
   transportation, like trains and buses, have separate facilities for
   whites and blacks. State-sponsored school segregation was declared
   unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1954 in
   Brown v. Board of Education. One of the first federal court cases to
   challenge segregation in schools was Mendez v. Westminster in 1946.

   In response to heightening discrimination and violence, non-violent
   acts of protest began to occur. For example, in February 1960, in
   Greensboro, North Carolina, four young African-American college
   students entered a Woolworth store and sat down at the counter but were
   refused service. The men had learned about non-violent protest in
   college, and continued to sit peacefully as whites tormented them at
   the counter, pouring ketchup on their heads and burning them with
   cigarettes. After this, many sit-ins took place to non-violently
   protest against racism and inequality. Sit-ins continued throughout the
   South and spread to other areas. Eventually, after many sit-ins and
   other non-violent protests, including marches and boycotts, places
   began to agree to desegregate.^[25]^[broken citation]

   The 16th Street Baptist Church bombing marked a turning point during
   the Civil Rights Era, by attracting national attention. On Sunday,
   September 15, 1963 with a stack of dynamite hidden on an outside
   staircase, Ku Klux Klansmen destroyed one side of the Birmingham
   church. The bomb exploded in proximity to twenty-six children preparing
   in basement assembly room. The explosion killed four black girls,
   Carole Robertson (14), Cynthia Wesley (14), Denise McNair (11) and
   Addie Mae Collins (14).^[26]^[27]

   With the bombing only a couple weeks after Martin Luther King's March
   on Washington, it became an integral aspect of transformed perceptions
   of conditions for blacks in America. It influenced the passage of the
   Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act, which overruled
   remaining Jim Crow laws. Nonetheless, neither had been implemented by
   the end of the 1960s.

   Segregation continued even after the demise of the Jim Crow laws. Data
   on house prices and attitudes toward integration from suggest that in
   the mid-20th century, segregation was a product of collective actions
   taken by whites to exclude blacks from their neighborhoods.^[28]
   Segregation also took the form of redlining, the practice of denying or
   increasing the cost of services, such as banking, insurance, access to
   jobs,^[29] access to health care,^[30] or even supermarkets^[31] to
   residents in certain, often racially determined,^[32] areas. Although
   in the United States informal discrimination and segregation have
   always existed, redlining began with the National Housing Act of 1934,
   which established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). The
   practice was fought first through passage of the Fair Housing Act of
   1968 (which prevents redlining when the criteria for redlining are
   based on race, religion, gender, familial status, disability, or ethnic
   origin), and later through the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977,
   which requires banks to apply the same lending criteria in all
   communities.^[33] Although redlining is illegal some argue that it
   continues to exist in other forms.

Present[edit]

   While substantial gains were made in the succeeding decades through
   middle class advancement and public employment, black poverty and lack
   of education^[34] deepened in the context of de-industrialization.^[35]
   Prejudice, discrimination, and institutional racism (see below)
   continue to affect African Americans.

   From 1981 to 1997, the United States Department of Agriculture
   discriminated against tens of thousands of Black American farmers,
   denying loans provided to white farmers in similar circumstances. The
   discrimination was the subject of the Pigford v. Glickman lawsuit
   brought by members of the National Black Farmers Association, which
   resulted in two settlement agreements of $1.25 billion in 1999 and of
   $1.15 billion in 2009.^[36]

   It is argued that there exists a color blindness or an "understanding
   that cultural differences rooted in racial identities are irrelevant
   for peoples' prospects and their overall well-being".^[37] Yet, one
   counter-example to this claim is that employer interviews reveal
   reluctance from both black and white employers to employ "urban young
   males who exhibit lower-class behavioral styles", highlighting the
   existence of embedded socio-economic preconceptions.^[38]

   Furthermore, many cite the 2008 United States presidential election as
   a step forward in race relations: White Americans played a role in
   electing Barack Obama, the country's first black president.^[39] In
   fact, Obama received a greater percentage of the white vote (43%),^[40]
   than did the previous Democratic candidate, John Kerry (41%).^[41]
   Racial divisions persisted throughout the election; wide margins of
   Black voters gave Obama an edge during the presidential primary, where
   8 out of 10 African-Americans voted for him in the primaries, and an
   MSNBC poll showed that race was a key factor in whether a candidate was
   perceived as being ready for office. In South Carolina, for
   instance,"Whites were far likelier to name Clinton than Obama as being
   most qualified to be commander in chief, likeliest to unite the country
   and most apt to capture the White House in November. Blacks named Obama
   over Clinton by even stronger margins — two- and three-to one — in all
   three areas."^[42]

   Sociologist Russ Long alleged in 2013 that there is now a more subtle
   racism that associates a specific race with a specific
   characteristic.^[43] In a 1993 study conducted by Katz and Braly, it
   was presented that "blacks and whites hold a variety of stereotypes
   towards each other, often negative."^[44] The Katz and Braley study
   also alleged that African-Americans and Whites view the traits that
   they identify each other with as threatening, interracial communication
   between the two is likely to be "hesitant, reserved, and
   concealing."^[44] Interracial communication is guided by stereotypes;
   stereotypes are transferred into personality and character traits which
   lead to have an effect on communication. Multiple factors go into how
   stereotypes are established, such as age and the setting in which they
   are being applied.^[44] For example, in a study done by the
   Entman-Rojecki Index of Race and Media in 2014, 89% of Black women in
   movies are shown swearing and acting in offensive behavior while only
   17% of White women are portrayed in this manner.^[45]

Asian Americans[edit]

   A Sinophobic cartoon called "Yellow terror" appearing in the United
   States in 1899
   See also: Sinophobia, Chinese American history, Anti-Chinese sentiment
   in the United States, Anti-Japanese sentiment in the United States and
   Yellow Peril

   In the Pacific States, racism was primarily directed against the
   resident Asian immigrants. Several immigration laws discriminated
   against the Asians, and at different points the ethnic Chinese or other
   groups were banned from entering the United States.^[46] Nonwhites were
   prohibited from testifying against whites, a prohibition extended to
   the Chinese by People v. Hall.^[47] The Chinese were often subject to
   harder labor on the First Transcontinental Railroad and often performed
   the more dangerous tasks such as using dynamite to make pathways
   through the mountains.^[48] Anti-Chinese sentiment was also rife in
   early Los Angeles, culminating in a notorious 1871 riot in which a mob
   attacked Chinese residents.^[49]

   During World War II, the United States created internment camps for
   Japanese-American citizens in fear that they would be used as spies for
   the Japanese.^[50] Currently implemented immigration laws are still
   largely plagued with national origin-based quotas that are unfavorable
   to Asian countries due to large populations and historically low U.S.
   immigration rates^[51]

   Over the winter spanning 1929 and 1930, anti-Filipino racism exploded
   in the Central Coast area surrounding Watsonville over labor tensions
   and general xenophobia. Filipino farm workers were terrorized for
   "taking jobs from whites", and for mixing with white women; in
   California, and many states, Filipinos were barred from marrying White
   Americans (a group which included Hispanic Americans). Violence was
   directed towards Filipinos, some resulting in deaths, and a Filipino
   establishment was dynamited. A race war broke out in the Bay Area, with
   roving gangs of whites pulling Filipinos from their homes and
   dwellings, until the violence subsided. As a result of the riots,
   California's attitude changed towards importing cheaper Asian labor,
   moving towards utilizing cheaper Mexican labor instead.^[52]

European immigrants[edit]

   Various European-American immigrant groups have been subject to
   discrimination either on the basis of their immigrant status (known as
   "Nativism") or on the basis of their ethnicities (country of origin).
   Philadelphia Nativist Riots.
   New York Times, 1854 ad, reading "No Irish need apply."

   In the 19th century, this was particularly true of anti-Irish
   prejudice, which was partly anti-Catholic sentiment, partly anti-Irish
   as an ethnicity. This was especially true for Irish Catholics who
   immigrated to the U.S. in the mid-19th century; the large number of
   Irish (both Catholic and Protestant) who settled in America in the 18th
   century had largely (but not entirely) escaped such discimination and
   eventually blended into the American white population.

   The 20th century saw discrimination against immigrants from southern
   and eastern Europe (notably Italian-Americans and Polish Americans),
   partly from anti-Catholic sentiment (as against Irish-Americans), and
   partly from Nordicism, which considered all non-Germanic,
   non-Scandinavian, or non-British immigrants as racially inferior – see
   Nordicism in the USA.
   “ Biological laws tell us that certain divergent people will not mix or
     blend. The Nordics propagate themselves successfully. With other races,
     the outcome shows deterioration on both sides.                         ”

   —Future US president Calvin Coolidge, 1921.^[53]

   Nordicism led to the reduction in Southern European, along with Slavic
   Eastern European and Russian immigrants in the National Origins Formula
   of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and the Immigration Act of 1924,
   whose goal was to maintain the status quo distribution of ethnicity by
   limiting immigration in proportion to existing populations. This
   reduced the inflow from the average prior to 1921 of 176,983 from
   northern, central and western Europe, and 685,531 for other countries,
   principally Southern and Russia, to a 1924 level of 140,999 for
   northern, central and western Europe, and 21,847 for other countries,
   principally Southern and Russia (from a 1:3.9 ratio to a 6.4:1 ratio).

   There was also discrimination against German-Americans and
   Italian-Americans due to these being enemy countries in World War I
   (Germany) and World War II (Germany and Italy). This resulted in a
   sharp decrease in German-American ethnic identity and a sharp decrease
   in the use of German in the United States following WWI, which had
   hitherto been significant, and to German American internment and
   Italian American internment during WWII; see also World War I
   anti-German sentiment.

   Specific European-American ethnicities significantly diminished as a
   political issue in the 1930s, being replaced by a bi-racialism of
   Black/White, as described and predicted by Lothrop Stoddard, due to
   numerous causes. The National Origins Formula significantly reduced
   inflows of non-Nordic ethnicities; the Great Migration (of
   African-Americans out of the South) displaced anti-White immigrant
   racism with anti-Black racism; and the Great Depression brought
   economic concerns to the fore.

   Anti-Catholic sentiment remained evident in the presidential campaign
   of John F. Kennedy, who nevertheless went on to become the US's first
   Catholic (and indeed non-Protestant) president.

   After the fall of the Berlin Wall and collapse of the Soviet Union in
   the late 1980s and early 1990s, many immigrants came to the United
   States from Russia. A new type of racism which is based on the former
   Cold War stereotypes began to target people from the former Soviet
   states. There are many jokes refer to a communist past, corruption,
   high alcohol consumption, high crime rate, prostitution, and
   unemployment. Some people began to use words like Eurotrash, mafia,
   commie, Borat, and Russki when refer to Russians, Ukrainians,
   Belarusians, or Balkan peoples (mainly Serbs and Albanians).^[citation
   needed] During the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver NBC's
   commenter Mike Milbury used the term Eurotrash to describe the Russian
   hockey team. Jokes about Russian mail-order brides, European
   prostitutes and fashion models, the revival of Eastern-European and
   Latin-European (especially Polish and Italian) ethnic stereotypes in
   movies and television shows (Jersey Shore, The Sopranos, My Big Fat
   Greek Wedding, The Real Housewives of New Jersey and It's Always Sunny
   in Philadelphia) and offensive images became popular among young people
   in the United States.

Latin Americans[edit]

   Americans of Latin American ancestry (often categorized as "Hispanic")
   come from a wide variety of racial and ethnic backgrounds. Latinos are
   not all distinguishable as a racial minority.

   After the Mexican-American War (1846–1848), the U.S. annexed much of
   the current Southwestern region from Mexico. Mexicans residing in that
   territory found themselves subject to discrimination. It is estimated
   that at least 597 Mexicans were lynched between 1848 and 1928 (this is
   a conservative estimate due to lack of records in many reported
   lynchings). Mexicans were lynched at a rate of 27.4 per 100,000 of
   population between 1880 and 1930. This statistic is second only to that
   of the African American community during that period, which suffered an
   average of 37.1 per 100,000 population.^[54] Between 1848 to 1879,
   Mexicans were lynched at an unprecedented rate of 473 per 100,000 of
   population.^[55]

   During The Great Depression, the U.S. government sponsored a Mexican
   Repatriation program which was intended to encourage Mexican immigrants
   to voluntarily return to Mexico, however, many were forcibly removed
   against their will. In total, up to one million persons of Mexican
   ancestry were deported, approximately 60 percent of those individuals
   were actually U.S. citizens.^[56]

   The Zoot Suit Riots were vivid incidents of racial violence against
   Latinos (e.g. Mexican-Americans) in Los Angeles in 1943. Naval
   servicemen stationed in a Latino neighborhood conflicted with youth in
   the dense neighborhood. Frequent confrontations between small groups
   and individuals had intensified into several days of non-stop rioting.
   Large mobs of servicemen would enter civilian quarters looking to
   attack Mexican American youths, some of whom were wearing zoot suits, a
   distinctive exaggerated fashion popular among that group.^[57] The
   disturbances continued unchecked, and even assisted, by the local
   police for several days before base commanders declared downtown Los
   Angeles and Mexican American neighborhoods off-limits to
   servicemen.^[58]

   Many public institutions, businesses, and homeowners associations had
   official policies to exclude Mexican Americans. School children of
   Mexican American descent were subject to racial segregation in the
   public school system. In many counties, Mexican Americans were excluded
   from serving as jurors in court cases, especially in those that
   involved a Mexican American defendant. In many areas across the
   Southwest, they lived in separate residential areas, due to laws and
   real estate company policies.^[59]^[60]^[61]^[62]

   During the 1960s, Mexican American youth formed the Chicano Civil
   Rights Movement.

Middle Eastern and South Asian Americans[edit]

   See also: Anti-Arabism, Islamophobia, Anti-Iranian sentiment and
   Antisemitism in the United States
   An Assyrian church vandalized in Detroit (2007). Assyrians, although
   not Arabs and mostly Christians, often face backlash in the US for
   their Middle Eastern background.^[63]

   People of Middle Eastern and South Asian descent historically occupied
   an ambiguous racial status in the United States. Middle Eastern and
   South Asian immigrants were among those who sued in the late 19th and
   early 20th century to determine whether they were "white" immigrants as
   required by naturalization law. By 1923, courts had vindicated a
   "common-knowledge" standard, concluding that "scientific evidence",
   including the notion of a "Caucasian race" including Middle Easterners
   and many South Asians, was incoherent. Legal scholar John Tehranian
   argues that in reality this was a "performance-based" standard,
   relating to religious practices, education, intermarriage and a
   community's role in the United States.^[64]

Arab Americans[edit]

   Racism against Arab Americans^[65] and racialized Islamophobia against
   Muslims has risen concomitantly with tensions between the American
   government and the Islamic world.^[66] Following the September 11, 2001
   attacks in the United States, discrimination and racialized violence
   has markedly increased against Arab Americans and many other religious
   and cultural groups.^[67] Scholars, including Sunaina Maira and Evelyn
   Alsultany, argue that in the post-September 11 climate, Muslim
   Americans have been racialized within American society, although the
   markers of this racialization are cultural, political, and religious
   rather than phenotypic.^[68]^[69]

   Arab Americans in particular were most demonized which led to hatred
   towards Middle Easterners living in the United States and elsewhere in
   the Western world.^[70]^[71] There have been attacks against Arabs not
   only on the basis of their religion (Islam), but also on the basis of
   their ethnicity; numerous Christian Arabs have been attacked based on
   their appearances.^[72] In addition, other Middle Eastern peoples
   (Iranians, Assyrians, Armenians, Jews, Turks, Yezidis, Kurds, etc.) who
   are mistaken for Arabs because of perceived "similarities in
   appearance" have been collateral victims of anti-Arabism.

   Non-Arab and non-Muslim Middle Eastern people, as well as South Asians
   of different ethnic/religious backgrounds (Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs)
   have been stereotyped as "Arabs". The case of Balbir Singh Sodhi, a
   Sikh who was murdered at a Phoenix gas station by a white supremacist
   for "looking like an Arab terrorist" (because of the turban that is a
   requirement of Sikhism), as well as that of Hindus being attacked for
   "being Muslims" have achieved prominence and criticism following the
   September 11 attacks.^[73]^[74]

   Those of Middle Eastern descent who are in the United States military
   sometimes face racism from fellow soldiers. Army Spc Zachari Klawonn
   endured numerous instances of racism during his enlistment at Fort
   Hood, Texas. During his basic training he was made to put cloth around
   his head and play the role of terrorist. His fellow soldiers had to
   take him down to the ground and draw guns on him. He was also called
   things such as "raghead", "sand monkey", and "Zachari bin
   Laden"."^[75]^[76]

   A 2011 study reported that while official parameters encompass Arabs as
   part of the White American racial category, many Arab Americans from
   places other than the Levant feel they are not white and are not
   perceived as white by American society."^[77]^[not in citation given]

Iranian Americans[edit]

   See also: Anti-Iranian sentiment
   A man holding a sign that reads "deport all Iranians" and "get the hell
   out of my country" during a protest of the Iran hostage crisis in
   Washington, D.C. in 1979.

   The November 1979 Iranian hostage crisis of the U.S. embassy in Tehran
   precipitated a wave of anti-Iranian sentiment in the United States,
   directed both against the new Islamic regime and Iranian nationals and
   immigrants. Even though such sentiments gradually declined after the
   release of the hostages at the start of 1981, they sometimes flare up.
   In response, some Iranian immigrants to the U.S. have distanced
   themselves from their nationality and instead identify primarily on the
   basis of their ethnic or religious affiliations.^[78]

   Since the 1980s and especially since the 1990s, it has been argued,
   Hollywood's depiction of Iranians has gradually shown signs of
   vilifying Iranians.^[79] Hollywood network productions such as 24,^[80]
   John Doe, On Wings of Eagles (1986),^[81] Escape from Iran: The
   Canadian Caper (1981),^[82] and JAG almost regularly host Persian
   speaking villains in their storyline.

Antisemitism[edit]

   Main article: Antisemitism in the United States

   Antisemitism has also played a role in the United States. During the
   late 19th and early 20th centuries, hundreds of thousands of Jews were
   escaping the pogroms in Europe. They boarded boats from ports on the
   Baltic Sea and in Northern Germany, and largely arrived at Ellis
   Island, New York.^[83]

   It is thought by Leo Rosten, in his book, 'The Joys of Yiddish', that
   as soon as they left the boat, they were subject to racism from the
   port immigration authorities. The derogatory term 'kike' was adopted
   when referring to Jews (because they often could not write so they may
   have signed their immigration papers with circles - or kikel in
   Yiddish).^[84]

   From the 1910s, the Southern Jewish communities were attacked by the Ku
   Klux Klan, who objected to Jewish immigration, and often used 'The
   Jewish Banker' in their propaganda. In 1915, Texas-born, New York Jew
   Leo Frank was lynched by the newly re-formed Klan, after being
   convicted of rape and sentenced to death (his punishment was commuted
   to life imprisonment).^[85]

   The events in Nazi Germany also attracted attention from the United
   States. Jewish lobbying for intervention in Europe drew opposition from
   the isolationists, amongst whom was Father Charles Coughlin, a well
   known radio priest, who was known to be critical of Jews, believing
   that they were leading the United States into the war.^[86] He preached
   in weekly, overtly anti-Semitic sermons and, from 1936, began
   publication of a newspaper, Social Justice, in which he printed
   anti-Semitic accusations such as The Protocols of the Elders of
   Zion.^[86]

   A number of Jewish organizations, Christian organizations, Muslim
   organizations, and academics consider the Nation of Islam to be
   anti-Semitic. Specifically, they claim that the Nation of Islam has
   engaged in revisionist and antisemitic interpretations of the Holocaust
   and exaggerates the role of Jews in the African slave trade.^[87] The
   Jewish Anti-Defamation League (ADL) alleges that NOI Health Minister,
   Abdul Alim Muhammad, has accused Jewish doctors of injecting blacks
   with the AIDS virus,^[88] an allegation that Dr. Abdul Alim Muhammad
   has denied.^[citation needed]

   Although Jews are often perceived as white in the American mainstream,
   the relationship of Jews to whiteness remains complex, with many
   preferring not to identify as white.^[89]^[90]^[91]^[92] Prominent
   activist and rabbi Michael Lerner argues, in a 1993 Village Voice
   article, that "in America, to be 'white' means to be the beneficiary of
   the past 500 years of European exploration and exploitation of the rest
   of the world" and that "Jews can only be deemed white if there is
   massive amnesia on the part of non-Jews about the monumental history of
   anti-Semitism".^[93] African-American activist Cornel West, in an
   interview with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, has
   explained:
   “ Even if some Jews do believe that they're white, I think that they've
     been duped. I think that antisemitism has proven itself to be a
     powerful force in nearly every post of Western civilization where
     Christianity has a presence. And so even as a Christian, I say
     continually to my Jewish brothers and sisters: don't believe the hype
     about your full scale assimilation and integration into the mainstream.
     It only takes an event or two for a certain kind of anti-Jewish,
     antisemitic sensibility to surface in places that you would be
     surprised. But I'm just thoroughly convinced that America is not the
     promised land for Jewish brothers and sisters. A lot of Jewish brothers
     say, "No, that’s not true. We finally—yeah—they said that in
     Alexandria. You said that in Weimar Germany."^[94]                     ”

New antisemitism[edit]

   Main article: New antisemitism

   In recent years some scholars have advanced the concept of New
   antisemitism, coming simultaneously from the Far Left, the far right,
   and radical Islam, which tends to focus on opposition to the creation
   of a Jewish homeland in the State of Israel, and argue that the
   language of Anti-Zionism and criticism of Israel are used to attack
   Jews more broadly. In this view, the proponents of the new concept
   believe that criticisms of Israel and Zionism are often
   disproportionate in degree and unique in kind, and attribute this to
   antisemitism.^[95]

   Yehuda Bauer, Professor of Holocaust Studies at the Hebrew University
   of Jerusalem, considers the concept "new antisemitism" to be false,
   since it is in fact old antisemitism that remains latent and recurs
   whenever it is triggered. In his view, the current trigger is the
   Israeli situation, and if a compromise were achieved there antisemitism
   would decline but not disappear.

   Noted critics of Israel, such as Noam Chomsky and Norman Finkelstein
   question the extent of new antisemitism in the United States. Chomsky
   has stated that the Anti-Defamation League casts any question of
   pro-Israeli policy as antisemitism;^[96] Finkelstein stated supposed
   "new antisemitism" is a preposterous concept advanced by the ADL to
   combat critics of Israeli policy.^[97]

Antiziganism[edit]

   The Roma population in America has blended more-or-less seamlessly into
   the rest of society.^[citation needed] In the U.S., the term "Gypsy"
   has come to be associated with a trade, profession, or lifestyle more
   than the Romani ethnic/racial group.^[citation needed] Some Americans,
   especially those self-employed in the fortune-telling and psychic
   reading business,^[98] use the term "Gypsy" to describe themselves or
   their enterprise, despite having no ties to the Roma people. This can
   be chalked up to misperception and ignorance regarding the term rather
   than any bigotry or even anti-ziganism.^[99]^[dubious – discuss]

Native Americans[edit]

   Members of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation in Oklahoma around 1877. Notice
   the members with European and African ancestry. The Creek were
   originally from the Alabama region.

   Native Americans, who have lived on the North American continent for at
   least 10,000 years,^[100] had an enormously complex impact on American
   history and racial relations. During the colonial and independent
   periods, a long series of conflicts were waged, with the primary
   objective of obtaining resources of Native Americans. Through wars,
   massacres, forced displacement (such as in the Trail of Tears), and the
   imposition of treaties, land was taken and numerous hardships imposed.
   In 1540, the first racial strife was with Spaniard Hernando de Soto's
   expedition who enslaved and murdered in many New World communities. In
   the early 18th century, the English had enslaved nearly 800
   Choctaws.^[101] After the creation of the United States, the idea of
   Indian removal gained momentum. However, some Native Americans chose or
   were allowed to remain and avoided removal whereafter they were
   subjected to racist institutions in their ancestral homeland. The
   Choctaws in Mississippi described their situation in 1849, "we have had
   our habitations torn down and burned, our fences destroyed, cattle
   turned into our fields and we ourselves have been scourged, manacled,
   fettered and otherwise personally abused, until by such treatment some
   of our best men have died."^[102] Joseph B. Cobb, who moved to
   Mississippi from Georgia, described Choctaws as having "no nobility or
   virtue at all," and in some respect he found blacks, especially native
   Africans, more interesting and admirable, the red man's superior in
   every way. The Choctaw and Chickasaw, the tribes he knew best, were
   beneath contempt, that is, even worse than black slaves.^[103]
   Ideological expansionist justification (Manifest Destiny) included
   stereotyped perceptions of all Native Americans as "merciless Indian
   savages" (as described in the United States Declaration of
   Independence) despite successful American efforts at civilization as
   proven with the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Creek, and Choctaw. An egregious
   attempt occurred with the California gold rush, the first two years of
   which saw the deaths of thousands of Native Americans. Under Mexican
   rule in California, Indians were subjected to de facto enslavement
   under a system of peonage by the white elite. While in 1850, California
   formally entered the Union as a free state, with respect to the issue
   of slavery, the practice of Indian indentured servitude was not
   outlawed by the California Legislature until 1863.^[104]

   Military and civil resistance by Native Americans has been a constant
   feature of American history. So too have a variety of debates around
   issues of sovereignty, the upholding of treaty provisions, and the
   civil rights of Native Americans under U.S. law.

Reservation marginalization[edit]

   Once their territories were incorporated into the United States,
   surviving Native Americans were denied equality before the law and
   often treated as wards of the state.^[105]
   See also: Native American reservations

   Many Native Americans were relegated to reservations—constituting just
   4% of U.S. territory—and the treaties signed with them violated. Tens
   of thousands of American Indians and Alaska Natives were forced to
   attend a residential school system which sought to reeducate them in
   white settler American values, culture and economy, to "kill the
   Indian, save the man."^[106]^[107]

   Further dispossession of various kinds continues into the present,
   although these current dispossessions, especially in terms of land,
   rarely make major news headlines in the country (e.g., the Lenape
   people's recent fiscal troubles and subsequent land grab by the State
   of New Jersey), and sometimes even fail to make it to headlines in the
   localities in which they occur. Through concessions for industries such
   as oil, mining and timber and through division of land from the
   Allotment Act forward, these concessions have raised problems of
   consent, exploitation of low royalty rates, environmental injustice,
   and gross mismanagement of funds held in trust, resulting in the loss
   of $10–40 billion.^[108]

   The Worldwatch Institute notes that 317 reservations are threatened by
   environmental hazards, while Western Shoshone land has been subjected
   to more than 1,000 nuclear explosions.^[109]

Assimilation[edit]

   Benjamin Hawkins, seen here on his plantation, teaches Creek Native
   Americans how to use European technology. Painted in 1805.

   The government appointed agents, like Benjamin Hawkins, to live among
   the Native Americans and to teach them, through example and
   instruction, how to live like whites.^[110] America's first president,
   George Washington, formulated a policy to encourage the "civilizing"
   process.^[111] Washington had a six-point plan for civilization which
   included:

     1. impartial justice toward Native Americans
     2. regulated buying of Native American lands
     3. promotion of commerce
     4. promotion of experiments to civilize or improve Native American
     society
     5. presidential authority to give presents
     6. punishing those who violated Native American rights.^[112]

   The Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 granted U.S. citizenship to all
   Native Americans. Prior to the passage of the act, nearly two-thirds of
   Native Americans were already U.S. citizens.^[113] The earliest
   recorded date of Native Americans becoming U.S. citizens was in 1831
   when the Mississippi Choctaw became citizens after the United States
   Legislature ratified the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek. Under article
   XIV of that treaty, any Choctaw who elected not to move to Native
   American Territory could become an American citizen when he registered
   and if he stayed on designated lands for five years after treaty
   ratification. Citizenship could also be obtained by:

     1. Treaty Provision (as with the Mississippi Choctaw)
     2. Allotment under the Act of February 8, 1887
     3. Issuance of Patent in Fee Simple
     4. Adopting Habits of Civilized Life
     5. Minor Children
     6. Citizenship by Birth
     7. Becoming Soldiers and Sailors in the U.S. Armed Forces
     8. Marriage
     9. Special Act of Congress.

   “ Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
     United States of America in Congress assembled, That all noncitizen
     Native Americans born within the territorial limits of the United
     States be, and they are hereby, declared to be citizens of the United
     States: Provided, That the granting of such citizenship shall not in
     any manner impair or otherwise affect the right of any Native American
     to tribal or other property.                                          ”

   —-Indian Citizenship Act of 1924

   While formal equality has been legally estated, American Indians,
   Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders remain among
   the most economically disadvantaged groups in the country, and
   according to National mental health studies, American Indians as a
   group tend to suffer from high levels of alcoholism, depression and
   suicide.^[114]

Consequences[edit]

Developmental[edit]

   Using The Schedule of Racist Events (SRE), an 18-item self-report
   inventory that assesses the frequency of racist discrimination. Hope
   Landrine and Elizabeth A. Klonoff found that racist discrimination is
   rampant in the lives of African Americans and is strongly related to
   psychiatric symptoms.^[115] A study on racist events in the lives of
   African American women found that lifetime experiences of racism were
   positively related to lifetime history of both physical disease and
   frequency of recent common colds. These relationships were largely
   unaccounted for by other variables. Demographic variables such as
   income and education were not related to experiences of racism. The
   results suggest that racism can be detrimental to African American's
   well being.^[116] The physiological stress caused by racism has been
   documented in studies by Claude Steele, Joshua Aronson, and Steven
   Spencer on what they term "stereotype threat."^[117] Quite similarly,
   another example of the psychosocial consequences of discrimination have
   been observed in a study sampling Mexican-origin participants in
   Fresno, California. It was found that perceived discrimination is
   correlated with depressive symptoms, especially for those less
   acculturated in the United States, like Mexican immigrants and
   migrants.^[118]

   Along the vein of somatic responses to discrimination, Kennedy et al.
   found that both measures of collective disrespect were strongly
   correlated with black mortality (r = 0.53 to 0.56), as well as with
   white mortality (r = 0.48 to 0.54). These data suggest that racism,
   measured as an ecologic characteristic, is associated with higher
   mortality in both blacks and whites.^[119] Some researchers also
   suggest that racial segregation may lead to disparities in health and
   mortality. Thomas LaVeist (1989; 1993) tested the hypothesis that
   segregation would aid in explaining race differences in infant
   mortality rates across cities. Analyzing 176 large and midsized cities,
   LaVeist found support for the hypothesis. Since LaVeist's studies,
   segregation has received increased attention as a determinant of race
   disparities in mortality.^[120] Studies have shown that mortality rates
   for male and female African Americans are lower in areas with lower
   levels of residential segregation. Mortality for male and female Whites
   was not associated in either direction with residential
   segregation.^[121]

   Researchers Sharon A. Jackson, Roger T. Anderson, Norman J. Johnson and
   Paul D. Sorlie found that, after adjustment for family income,
   mortality risk increased with increasing minority residential
   segregation among Blacks aged 25 to 44 years and non-Blacks aged 45 to
   64 years. In most age/race/gender groups, the highest and lowest
   mortality risks occurred in the highest and lowest categories of
   residential segregation, respectively. These results suggest that
   minority residential segregation may influence mortality risk and
   underscore the traditional emphasis on the social underpinnings of
   disease and death.^[122] Rates of heart disease among African Americans
   are associated with the segregation patterns in the neighborhoods where
   they live (Fang et al. 1998). Stephanie A. Bond Huie writes that
   neighborhoods affect health and mortality outcomes primarily in an
   indirect fashion through environmental factors such as smoking, diet,
   exercise, stress, and access to health insurance and medical
   providers.^[123] Moreover, segregation strongly influences premature
   mortality in the US.^[124]

   As early as 1866, the Civil Rights Act provided a remedy for
   intentional race discrimination in employment by private employers and
   state and local public employers. The Civil Rights Act of 1871 applies
   to public employment or employment involving state action prohibiting
   deprivation of rights secured by the federal constitution or federal
   laws through action under color of law. Title VII is the principal
   federal statute with regard to employment discrimination prohibiting
   unlawful employment discrimination by public and private employers,
   labor organizations, training programs and employment agencies based on
   race or color, religion, gender, and national origin. Title VII also
   prohibits retaliation against any person for opposing any practice
   forbidden by statute, or for making a charge, testifying, assisting, or
   participating in a proceeding under the statute. The Civil Rights Act
   of 1991 expanded the damages available in Title VII cases and granted
   Title VII plaintiffs the right to a jury trial. Title VII also provides
   that race and color discrimination against every race and color is
   prohibited.

Societal[edit]

Schemas and stereotypes[edit]

   This racist postcard from the 1900s shows the casual denigration of
   black women. It states "I know you're not particular to a fault /
   Though I'm not sure you'll never be sued for assault / You're so fond
   of women that even a wench / Attracts your gross fancy despite her
   strong stench"

   Media
   See also: Stereotypes of African Americans, Stereotypes of East Asians
   in the Western world, Stereotypes of Native Americans and Stereotypes
   of West and Central Asians in the United States

   Popular culture (songs, theater) for European American audiences in the
   19th century created and perpetuated negative stereotypes of African
   Americans. One key symbol of racism against African Americans was the
   use of blackface. Directly related to this was the institution of
   minstrelsy. Other stereotypes of African Americans included the fat,
   dark-skinned "mammy" and the irrational, hypersexual male "buck".

   In recent years increasing numbers of African-American activists have
   asserted that rap music videos utilize African-American performers
   commonly enacting tropes of scantily clothed women and men as thugs or
   pimps. Church organized groups have protested outside the residence of
   Phillipe Dauman (Upper East Side (New York, NY)) (president and chief
   executive officer of Viacom) and the residence of Debra L. Lee
   (Northwest Washington DC) (chairman and chief executive of Black
   Entertainment Television, a unit of Viacom). Rev. Donald Coates, leader
   of a protest organization formed around the issue of the videos,
   "Enough is Enough!" said, "In the wake of the Imus affair, I began to
   think that the African-American community must be consistent in its
   outrage." The Clifton, Maryland minister has also said, "Why are these
   corporations making these images normative and mainstream?" ... "I can
   talk about this in the church until I am blue in the face, but we need
   to take it outside." The NAACP and the National Congress of Black Women
   also have called for the reform of images on videos and on television.
   Julian Bond said that in a segregated society, people get their
   impressions of other groups from what they see in videos and what they
   hear in music.^[125]^[126]^[127]^[128]

   In a similar vein, activists protested against the BET show, Hot Ghetto
   Mess, which satirizes the culture of working-class African-Americans.
   The protests resulted in the change of the television show name to We
   Got to Do Better.^[125]

   It is understood that representations of minorities in the media have
   the ability to reinforce or change stereotypes. For example, in one
   study, a collection of white subjects were primed by a comedy skit
   either showing a stereotypical or neutral portrayal of African-American
   characters. Participants were then required to read a vignette
   describing an incident of sexual violence, with the alleged offender
   either white or black, and assign a rating for perceived guilt. For
   those shown the stereotypical African-American character, there was a
   significantly higher guilt rating for black alleged offender in the
   subsequent vignette, in comparison to the other conditions.^[129]

   While schemas have an overt societal consequence, the strong
   development of them have lasting effect on recipients. Overall, it is
   found that strong in-group attitudes are correlated with academic and
   economic success. In a study analyzing the interaction of assimilation
   and racial-ethnic schemas for Hispanic youth found that strong
   schematic identities for Hispanic youth undermined academic
   achievement.^[130]

   Additional stereotypes attributed to minorities continue to influence
   societal interactions. For example, a 1993 Harvard Law Review article
   states that Asian-Americans are commonly viewed as submissive, as a
   combination of relative physical stature and Western comparisons of
   cultural attitudes. Furthermore, Asian-Americans are depicted as the
   model minority, unfair competitors, foreigners, and indistinguishable.
   These stereotypes can serve to dehumanize Asian-Americans and catalyze
   hostility and violence.^[131]

Formal discrimination[edit]

   Formal discrimination against minorities has been present throughout
   American history. In recent decades, formal has become less violent yet
   still overt. Within education, a survey of black students in sixteen
   majority white universities revealed that four of five
   African-Americans reported some form of racial discrimination. For
   example, in February 1988, the University of Michigan enforced a new
   anti discrimination code following the distribution of fliers saying
   blacks “don’t belong in classrooms, they belong hanging from trees”.
   Other forms of reported discrimination were refusal to sit next to
   black in lecture, ignored input in class settings, and informal
   segregation. While the penalties are imposed, the psychological
   consequences of formal discrimination can still manifest. Black
   students, for example, reported feelings of heightened isolation and
   suspicion. Furthermore, studies have shown that academic performance is
   stunted for black students with these feelings as a result of their
   campus race interactions.^[132]

   Minority-minority racism

   Minority racism is sometimes considered controversial because of
   theories of power in society. Some theories of racism insist that
   racism can only exist in the context of social power to impose it upon
   others.^[133] Yet discrimination and racism between racially
   marginalized groups has been noted. For example, there has been ongoing
   violence between African American and Mexican American gangs,
   particularly in Southern California.^[134]^[135]^[136]^[137] There have
   been reports of racially motivated attacks against Mexican Americans
   who have moved into neighborhoods occupied mostly by African Americans,
   and vice versa.^[138]^[139] According to gang experts and law
   enforcement agents, a longstanding race war between the Mexican Mafia
   and the Black Guerilla Family, a rival African American prison gang,
   has generated such intense racial hatred among Mexican Mafia leaders,
   or shot callers, that they have issued a "green light" on all blacks.
   This amounts to a standing authorization for Latino gang members to
   prove their mettle by terrorizing or even murdering any blacks sighted
   in a neighborhood claimed by a gang loyal to the Mexican Mafia.^[dead
   link]^[140] There have been several significant riots in California
   prisons where Mexican American inmates and African Americans have
   targeted each other particularly, based on racial reasons.^[141]^[142]

   There has also been noted conflict between recent immigrant groups and
   their established ethnic counterparts within the United States. Rapid
   growth in African and Caribbean immigrants has come into conflict with
   American blacks. Interaction and cooperation between black immigrants
   and American blacks are, ironically, debatable. One can argue that
   racial discrimination and cooperation is not ordinarily based on color
   of skin but more on shared common, cultural experiences, and
   beliefs.^[143]^[144] Furthermore, conflict between Chinese immigrants
   and Japanese Americans are known to have occurred in the San Gabriel
   Valley of the Los Angeles area in the 1980s.^[citation needed]

Interpersonal discrimination[edit]

   In a manner that defines interpersonal discrimination in the United
   States, Darryl Brown of the Virginia Law Review states that while “our
   society has established a consensus against blatant, intentional racism
   and in decades since Brown v Board of Education has developed a
   sizeable set of legal remedies to address it”, our legal system
   “ignores the possibility that ‘race’ is structural or interstitial,
   that it can be the root of injury even when not traceable to a specific
   intention or action”^[145]

   Interpersonal discrimination is defined by its subtlety. Unlike formal
   discrimination, interpersonal discrimination is often not an overt or
   deliberate act of racism. For example, in an incident regarding a
   racial remark from a professor at Virginia Law, a rift was created by
   conflicting definitions of racism. For the students that defended the
   professor’s innocence, “racism was defined as an act of intentional
   maliciousness.” Yet for African-American’s, racism was broadened to a
   detrimental influence on “the substantive dynamics of the classroom”.
   As an effect, it is argued that the “daily repetition of subtle racism
   and subordination in the classroom and on campus can ultimately be, for
   African Americans, more productive of stress, anxiety and alienation
   than even blatant racists acts.” Moreover, the attention to these acts
   of discrimination diverts energy from academics, becoming a distraction
   that white students do not generally face.^[145]

Institutional[edit]

   Institutional racism is the theory that aspects of the structure,
   pervasive attitudes, and established institutions of society
   disadvantage some racial groups, although not by an overtly
   discriminatory mechanism.^[146] There are several factors that play
   into institutional racism, including but not limited to: accumulated
   wealth/benefits from racial groups that have benefited from past
   discrimination, educational and occupational disadvantages faced by
   non-native English speakers in the United States, ingrained
   stereotypical images that still remain in the society (e.g. black men
   are likely to be criminals).^[147]

Immigration[edit]

   See also: Immigration to the United States

   Access to United States citizenship was restricted by race, beginning
   with the Naturalization Act of 1790 which refused naturalization to
   "non-whites". Many in the modern United States forget the
   institutionalized prejudice against white followers of Roman
   Catholicism who immigrated from countries such as Ireland, Germany,
   Italy and France.^[148] Other efforts include the 1882 Chinese
   Exclusion Act and the 1924 National Origins Act.^[149]^[150] The
   Immigration Act of 1924 was aimed at further restricting the Southern
   Europeans and Russians who had begun to enter the country in large
   numbers beginning in the 1890s.

   In conjunction with immigration reform in the late 1980s (seen with the
   Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986), there have been noted
   IRCA-related discriminatory behavior toward Hispanics within
   employment. As the measure made it unlawful to hire without
   authorization to work in the United States, avoidant treatment toward
   “foreign-appearing workers” increased to bypass the required
   record-keeping or risk of sanctions.^[151]

Wealth[edit]

   See also: Wealth inequality in the United States

   Massive racial differentials in account of wealth remain in the United
   States: between whites and African Americans, the gap is a factor of
   twenty.^[152] An analyst of the phenomenon, Thomas Shapiro, professor
   of law and social policy at Brandeis University argues, "The wealth gap
   is not just a story of merit and achievement, it's also a story of the
   historical legacy of race in the United States."^[153] Differentials
   applied to the Social Security Act (which excluded agricultural
   workers, a sector that then included most black workers), rewards to
   military officers, and the educational benefits offered returning
   soldiers after World War II. Pre-existing disparities in wealth are
   exacerbated by tax policies that reward investment over waged income,
   subsidize mortgages, and subsidize private sector developers.^[154]

Health care[edit]

   See also: Race and health

   There are major racial differences in access to health care and in the
   quality of health care provided. A study published in the American
   Journal of Public Health estimated that: "over 886,000 deaths could
   have been prevented from 1991 to 2000 if African Americans had received
   the same care as whites." The key differences they cited were lack of
   insurance, inadequate insurance, poor service, and reluctance to seek
   care.^[155] A history of government-sponsored experimentation, such as
   the notorious Tuskegee Syphilis Study has left a legacy of African
   American distrust of the medical system.^[156]

   Inequalities in health care may also reflect a systemic bias in the way
   medical procedures and treatments are prescribed for different ethnic
   groups. Raj Bhopal writes that the history of racism in science and
   medicine shows that people and institutions behave according to the
   ethos of their times and warns of dangers to avoid in the future.^[157]
   Nancy Krieger contended that much modern research supported the
   assumptions needed to justify racism. Racism she writes underlies
   unexplained inequities in health care, including treatment for heart
   disease,^[158] renal failure,^[159] bladder cancer,^[160] and
   pneumonia.^[161] Raj Bhopal writes that these inequalities have been
   documented in numerous studies. The consistent and repeated findings
   that black Americans receive less health care than white
   Americans—particularly where this involves expensive new
   technology.^[162]

Politics[edit]

   It is argued that racial “coding” of concepts like crime and welfare
   has been used to strategically influence public political views. Racial
   coding is implicit; it incorporates racially primed language or imagery
   to allude to racial attitudes and thinking. For example, in the context
   of domestic policy, it is argued that Ronald Reagan implied linkages
   between concepts like “special interests” and “big government” with
   ill-perceived minority groups in the 1980s, using the conditioned
   negativity toward the minority groups to discredit certain policies and
   programs during campaigns. In a study analyzing how political ads prime
   attitudes, Valentino compares the voting responses of participants
   after being exposed to narration of a George W. Bush advertisement
   paired with three different types of visuals with different embedded
   racial cues to create three conditions: neutral, race comparison, and
   undeserving blacks. For example, as the narrator states “Democrats want
   to spend your tax dollars on wasteful government programs”, the video
   shows an image of a black woman and child in an office setting.
   Valentino found that the undeserving blacks condition produced the
   largest primed effect in racialized policies, like opposition to
   affirmative action and welfare spending.^[163]

Justice system[edit]

   Racism has been noted in all levels of the U.S. justice system.
   According to 2009 congressional testimony from Marc Mauer; while
   African Americans comprise 13% of the US population and 14% of monthly
   drug users they are 37% of the people arrested for drug offenses; as
   well as 56% of the people in state prisons for drug offenses. The U.S.
   Sentencing Commission reported in March 2010 that in the federal system
   black offenders receive sentences that are 10% longer than white
   offenders for the same crimes. A July 2009 report by the Sentencing
   Project found that two-thirds of the people in the US with life
   sentences are non-white.^[164]

Contemporary issues in American racism[edit]

Hate crimes[edit]

   Main article: Hate crime

   Most hate crimes in the United States target victims on the basis of
   race or ethnicity (for Federal purposes, crimes targeting Hispanics
   based on that identity are considered based on ethnicity). Leading
   forms of bias cited in the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program,
   based on law enforcement agency filings are: anti-black, anti-Jewish,
   anti-white, anti-homosexual, and anti-Hispanic bias in that order in
   both 2004 and 2005.^[165] According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics
   Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics had similar rates of violent hate crime
   victimization between 2007-2011.^[166] The National Criminal
   Victimization Survey found that per capita rates of hate crime
   victimization varied little by race or ethnicity, and the differences
   are not statistically significant.^[167]

   The New Century Foundation, a white nationalist organization founded by
   Jared Taylor, argues that blacks are more likely than whites to commit
   hate crimes, and that FBI figures inflate the number of hate crimes
   committed by whites by counting Hispanics as "white".^[168] Other
   analysts are sharply critical of the NCF's findings, referring to the
   criminological mainstream view that "Racial and ethnic data must be
   treated with caution. Existing research on crime has generally shown
   that racial or ethnic identity is not predictive of criminal behavior
   with data which has been controlled for social and economic
   factors."^[169] NCF's methodology and statistics are further sharply
   criticized as flawed and deceptive by anti-racist activists Tim Wise
   and the Southern Poverty Law Center.^[170]^[171]

   The first post-Jim Crow era hate crime to make sensational media
   attention was the murder of Vincent Chin, an Asian American of Chinese
   descent in 1982. He was attacked by a two white assailants who were
   recently laid off from a Detroit area auto factory job and blamed the
   Japanese for their individual unemployment. Chin was not of Japanese
   descent, but the assailants testified at the criminal court case that
   he "looked like a Jap", an ethnic slur used to describe Japanese and
   other Asians, and that they were angry enough to beat him to death.

Hateful views from Americans[edit]

   Continuing antisemitism in the United States has remained an issue as
   the 2011 Survey of American Attitudes Toward Jews in America, released
   by the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), has found that the recent world
   economic recession increased some antisemitic viewpoints among
   Americans. Most people express pro-Jewish sentiments, with 64% of those
   surveyed agreeing that Jews have contributed much to U.S. social
   culture. Yet the polling found that 19% of Americans answered "probably
   true" to the antisemitic canard that "Jews have too much
   control/influence on Wall Street" while 15% concurred with the related
   statement that Jews seem "more willing to use shady practices" in
   business. Reflecting on the lingering antisemitism of about in five
   Americans, Abraham H. Foxman, ADL national director, has argued, "It is
   disturbing that with all of the strides we have made in becoming a more
   tolerant society, anti-Semitic beliefs continue to hold a vice-grip on
   a small but not insubstantial segment of the American public."^[172]

   An ABC News report in 2007 recounted that past ABC polls across several
   years have tended to find that "six percent have self-reported
   prejudice against Jews, 27 percent against Muslims, 25 percent against
   Arabs," and "one in 10 concedes harboring at least some such feelings"
   against Hispanic Americans. The report also remarked that a full 34% of
   Americans reported "some racist feelings" in general as a
   self-description.^[173] An Associated Press and Yahoo News survey of
   2,227 adult Americans in 2008 found that 10% of white respondents
   stated that "a lot" of discrimination against African-Americans exists
   while 45% answered "some" compared to 57% of black respondents
   answering that "a lot" exists. In the same poll, more whites applied
   positive attributes to black Americans than negative ones, with blacks
   describing whites even more highly, but a significant minority of
   whites still called their fellow Americans "irresponsible", "lazy", or
   other such things.^[174]

   Stanford University political scientist Paul Sniderman has remarked
   that, in the modern U.S., racial prejudice "is a deep challenge, and
   it's one that Americans in general, and for that matter, political
   scientists, just haven't been ready to acknowledge fully."^[174]

Alleviation[edit]

   There is a wide plethora of societal and political suggestions to
   alleviate the effects of continued discrimination in the United States.
   For example, within universities, it has been suggested that a type of
   committee could respond to non-sanctionable behavior.^[145]

   It is also argued that there is a need for “white students and faculty
   to reformulate white-awareness toward a more secure identity that is
   not threatened by black cultural institutions and that can recognize
   the racial non-neutrality of the institutions whites dominate” (Brown,
   334). Paired with this effort, Brown encourages the increase in
   minority faculty members, so the embedded white normative experience
   begins to fragment.^[145]

   Within media, it is found that racial cues prime racial stereotypic
   thought. Thus, it is argued that “stereotype inconsistent cues might
   lead to more intentioned thought, thereby suppressing racial priming
   effects” ^[163]

See also[edit]

   Portal icon United States portal
     * Anti-Americanism
     * Affirmative action in the United States
     * Anti-Irish racism
     * Anti-Polish sentiment
     * White power
     * Bigotry
     * Black supremacy
     * Constitutional colorblindness
     * List of racism-related topics
     * Racial equality proposal
     * Racism by country
     * Reverse discrimination
     * Sexism
     * Misogyny
     * Nativism in the United States
     * List of race riots in the United States
     * Race and crime in the United States
     * White privilege in the United States
     * Racism in Film of the United States
     * U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
     * Racial profiling in the United States
     * Anti-French sentiment in the United States
     * German American internment
     * Eugenics in the United States
     * Illegal immigration to the United States
     * Italian American internment
     * Japanese American internment
     * Anti-Italianism in the United States
     * Mass racial violence in the United States
     * Post-racial America
     * Manifest Destiny

References[edit]

   This article has an unclear citation style. The references used may be
   made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation,
   footnoting, or external linking. (September 2009)
    1. ^ Internment camps are particularly associated with World War II,
       but also occurred during World War I. Most significant was the
       Japanese American internment of 120,000 Japanese Americans during
       World War II. There was also internment of almost 11,000 German
       Americans in German American internment during World War II, and
       some Italian American internment.
    2. ^ In his 2009 visit to the US, the [UN] Special Rapporteur on
       Racism noted that "Socio-economic indicators show that poverty and
       race and ethnicity continue to overlap in the United States. This
       reality is a direct legacy of the past, in particular slavery,
       segregation, the forcible resettlement of Native Americans, which
       was confronted by the United States during the civil rights
       movement. However, whereas the country managed to establish equal
       treatment and non-discrimination in its laws, it has yet to redress
       the socioeconomic consequences of the historical legacy of
       racism."CERD Task Force of the US Human Rights Network (August
       2010). "From Civil Rights to Human Rights: Implementing US
       Obligations Under the International Convention on the Elimination
       of All forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)". Universal Periodic
       Review Joint Reports: United States of America. p. 44.
    3. ^ Henry, P. J., David O. Sears. Race and Politics: The Theory of
       Symbolic Racism. University of California, Los Angeles. 2002.
    4. ^ US Human Rights Network (August 2010). "The United States of
       America: Summary Submission to the UN Universal Periodic Review".
       Universal Periodic Review Joint Reports: United States of America.
       p. 8.
    5. ^ Darity Jr., William (2005). African Americans in the U.S. Economy
       (Africa, Europe, and the Origins of Uneven Development: The Role of
       Slavery). Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield. pp. 15–16.
    6. ^ "Darity Jr., 2005"
    7. ^ Eltis, David (December 1993). "Europeans and the Rise and Fall of
       African Slavery in the Americas: An Interpretation". The American
       Historical Review 98 (5): 1402–1422. doi:10.2307/2167060. Retrieved
       2013-10-19.
    8. ^ Eltis, David (2008). Extending the Frontiers: Essays on the New
       Transatlantic Slave Trade Database. United States of America: Yale
       University Press. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-300-13436-0.
    9. ^ Eltis, David. "Estimates". Retrieved October 19, 2013.
   10. ^ Alonzo L. Hamby, George Clack, and Mildred Sola Neely. "Outline
       of US History". US Department of State.
   11. ^ "Background on conflict in Liberia".
   12. ^ Maggie Montesinos Sale (1997). The slumbering volcano: American
       slave ship revolts and the production of rebellious masculinity.
       p.264. Duke University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-8223-1992-6
   13. ^ "The legal and diplomatic background to the seizure of foreign
       vessels". Pdavis.nl. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   14. ^ "Emancipation Proclamation (1863)". Ourdocuments.gov. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   15. ^ XIII - Slavery Abolished The Avalon Project
   16. ^ James McPherson, Drawn with the Sword, page 15
   17. ^ "The Deadliest War". Harvardmagazine.com. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   18. ^ Estreicher, Samuel (1974). "Federal Power to Regulate Private
       Discrimination: The Revival of the Enforcement Clauses of the
       Reconstruction Era Amendments". Columbia Law Review 74 (3):
       452–454.
   19. ^ Klarman, Michael (1998). "The Plessy Era". The Supreme Court
       Review: 307–308.
   20. ^ Beck, E.M.; Tolnay, Stewart (1990). "Black Flight: Lethal
       Violence and the Great Migration, 1900–1930". Social Science
       History 14 (3): 354. doi:10.2307/1171355.
   21. ^ Tolnay, Stewart (2003). "The African American 'Great Migration'
       and Beyond". Annual Review of Sociology 29: 221.
       doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100009.
   22. ^ Tolnay, Stewart (2003). "The African American 'Great Migration'
       and Beyond". Annual Review of Sociology 29: 213.
       doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100009.
   23. ^ Beck, E.M.; Tolnay, Stewart (1990). "Black Flight: Lethal
       Violence and the Great Migration, 1900-1930". Social Science
       History 14 (3): 351–352. doi:10.2307/1171355.
   24. ^ Tolnay, Stewart (2003). "The African American 'Great Migration'
       and Beyond". Annual Review of Sociology 29: 218–221.
       doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100009.
   25. ^ "The Dream of Equality, 1954-1974". American History.  Missing or
       empty |url= (help)
   26. ^ Ravitz, Jessica. "Siblings of the bombing: Remembering Birmingham
       church blast 50 years on". Retrieved October 20, 2013.
   27. ^ "Birmingham Church Bombed". L.A. Rebellion: Film & Television
       Archive. Retrieved October 20, 2013.
   28. ^ The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto David M. Cutler,
       Edward L. Glaeser, Jacob L. Vigdor The Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 107, No. 3 (Jun., 1999), pp. 455-506
   29. ^ "Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities" (PDF). Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   30. ^ See: Race and health
   31. ^ In poor health: Supermarket redlining and urban nutrition,
       Elizabeth Eisenhauer, GeoJournal Volume 53, Number 2, February 2001
   32. ^ How East New York Became a Ghetto by Walter Thabit. ISBN
       0-8147-8267-1. Page 42.
   33. ^ Comeback Cities: A Blueprint for Urban Neighborhood Revival By
       Paul S. Grogan, Tony Proscio. ISBN 0-8133-3952-9. 2002. p. 114.
       "The goal was not to relax lending restrictions but rather to get
       banks to apply the same criteria in the inner-city as in the
       suburbs."
   34. ^ "JBHE Statistical Shocker of the Year". Jbhe.com. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   35. ^ Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural
       America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 400-414.
   36. ^ Southall, Ashley (2010-05-25). "Bias Payments Come Too Late for
       Some Farmers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved
       2010-05-26.
   37. ^ Blau, Judith (2002). "White Supremacy and Racism in the
       Post-Civil Rights Era by Eduardo Bonilla-Silva". Contemporary
       Sociology 31 (5): 527. doi:10.2307/3090024.
   38. ^ Loury, Glenn (1998). "Discrimination in the Post-Civil Rights
       Era: Beyond Market Intercations". The Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 12 (2): 123. doi:10.1257/jep.12.2.117.
   39. ^ White Americans play major role in electing the first black
       president, Los Angeles Times
   40. ^ "Inside Obama's Sweeping Victory". Pew Research Center. November
       5, 2008.
   41. ^ "U.S. President: National: Exit Poll". CNN.
   42. ^ "Strong black vote gives Obama big boost". MSNBC. 2008-01-26.
       Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   43. ^ http://dmc122011.delmar.edu/socsci/rlong/problems/chap-08.htm
   44. ^ ^a ^b ^c Leonard, Rebecca and Locke, Don C. “Communication
       Stereotypes: Is Interracial Communication Possible?” Journal of
       Black Studies 23.3 (1993): 332-343. JSTOR. Web. 26 Jan 2014
   45. ^ Orbe, Mark P., and Tina M. Harris. "Interracial Communication:
       Theory Into Practice."Google Books. Sage Publications, n.d. Web. 02
       Feb. 2014
   46. ^ "Immigration...Chinese:Exclusion". Memory.loc.gov. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   47. ^ "Text of People v. Hall decision". Cetel.org. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   48. ^ Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural
       America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 196-98.
   49. ^ "The Chinese Outrage in Los Angeles – Verdict of the Corner's
       Jury". The New York Times. November 7, 1871.
   50. ^ "Internment of German Americans in the United States during World
       War II". Foitimes.com. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   51. ^ "Diversity Visa Program and Its Susceptibility to Fraud and
       Abuse". Commdocs.house.gov. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   52. ^ Racial hate once flared on the West Coast
   53. ^ Coolidge, Calvin (1921). "Whose Country is This?". Good
       Housekeeping: 14.
   54. ^ The lynching of persons of Mexican origin or descent in^[dead
       link]
   55. ^ "The lynching of persons of Mexican origin or descent in the
       United States, 1848 to 1928 | Journal of Social History | Find
       Articles at BNET.com". Findarticles.com. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   56. ^
       http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1038&con
       text=lawrev
   57. ^ Richard Griswold del Castillo, "The Los Angeles "Zoot Suit Riots"
       Revisited: Mexican and Latin American Perspectives," Mexican
       Studies/Estudios Mexicanos, Vol. 16, No. 2. (Summer, 2000), pp.
       367-391.
   58. ^ Arthur C. Verge, "The Impact of the Second World War on Los
       Angeles," The Pacific Historical Review, Vol. 63, No. 3, Fortress
       California at War: San Francisco, Los Angeles, Oakland, and San
       Diego, 1941-1945. (Aug., 1994), pp. 306-7.
   59. ^ "Teachers' Domain: Mendez v. Westminster: Desegregating
       California's Schools". Teachersdomain.org. 2004-12-22. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   60. ^ "Handbook of Texas Online - HERNANDEZ V. STATE OF TEXAS".
       Tshaonline.org. 1927-02-16. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   61. ^ "RACE - History - Post-War Economic Boom and Racial
       Discrimination". Understandingrace.org. 1956-12-21. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   62. ^ Black, Brown, Yellow, and Left: Radical Activism in Los Angeles -
       Laura Pulido - Google Boeken. Books.google.com. 2005-12-17.
       ISBN 9780520938892. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   63. ^ "Arab American Institute Still Deliberately Claiming Assyrians
       Are Arabs". Assyrian International News Agency. Retrieved
       2008-02-09.
   64. ^ John Tehranian, "Performing Whiteness: Naturalization Litigation
       and the Construction of Racial Identity in America," The Yale Law
       Journal, Vol. 109, No. 4. (Jan., 2000), pp. 817–848.
   65. ^ Leonard, Karen. University of California, Irvine. Western Knight
       Center. "American Muslims: South Asian Contributions to the Mix."
       2005. July 28, 2007. [1]
   66. ^ Netton, Ian Richard; Evelyn Alsultany (2006). "From ambiguity to
       abjection: Iraqi-Americans negotiating race in the United States".
       In Zahia Smail Salhi (ed.). The Arab diaspora: Voices of an
       anguished scream. Taylor & Francis. pp. 140–43.
       ISBN 978-0-415-37542-9.
   67. ^ "United States". Hrw.org. 2001-09-11. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   68. ^ "While African-Americans, Asians, and Native Americans are
       racialized according to phenotype, Arab-Americans are often
       racialized according to religion and politics. Religious
       racialization conflates Arabs and Islam, and consequently positions
       all Arabs as Muslim; represents Islam as a monolithic religion
       erasing diversity among Arabs and Muslims; and marks Islam as a
       backwards, fanatical, uncivilized, and a terroristic belief system"
       (p. 127). "Whereas before September 11, Arab- and Muslim-Americans
       were not included in discourses on race and racism in the United
       States, a public discourse emerged after September 11 on whether
       Arabs and Muslims were being treated fairly or being subjected to
       racism with the rise in hate crimes and government measures
       targeting Arabs and Muslims" (p. 141). Alsultany, Evelyn (2006).
       "From ambiguity to abjection: Iraqi-Americans negotiating race in
       the United States". In Zahia Smail Salhi, Ian Richard Netton
       (eds.). The Arab diaspora: Voices of an anguished scream. Taylor &
       Francis. p. 127. ISBN 978-0-415-37542-9.
   69. ^ "'Muslim' identity has certainly congealed as a marker of
       exclusion and marginalization, in relation to white or mainstream
       America, which is subjected to similar processes of racialization,
       and racism, that operate for racial minority groups."Maira, Sunaina
       (January 2009). Missing: youth, citizenship, and empire after 9/11.
       Duke University Press. p. 229. ISBN 978-0-8223-4409-4.
   70. ^ "Independent News Media - War in Iraq". Columbus Free Press.
       Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   71. ^ Abdul Malik Mujahid. "Demonization of Muslims Caused the Iraq
       Abuse". Soundvision.com. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   72. ^ Attacks on Arab Americans (PBS)
   73. ^ February 11, 2009, 8:55 PM (2009-02-11). "Hindu Beaten Because
       He's Muslim, Mistaken Anti-Islam Thugs Pummel, Hogtie And Stab
       Deliveryman". CBS News. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   74. ^ "ADL Condemns Hate Crime Against Hindu". Anti-Defamation League
       (ADL). Retrieved 2008-07-18.
   75. ^ Bradley Blackburn and Margaret Aro (April 14, 2010).
       "Muslim-American Soldier Claims Harassment in the Army". ABC World
       News with Diane Sawyer. American Broadcasting Company. Retrieved
       March 15, 2013.
   76. ^ "An American Soldier, who happens to be Muslim - The Documentary
       (51:36)". YouTube. Jan 28, 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2013.
   77. ^ Caliber - Sociological Perspectives - 47(4):371 - Abstract.
       Caliber.ucpress.net. 2011-03-31. JSTOR 3738776.
   78. ^ Bozorgmehr, Mehdi (2001-05-02). "No solidarity: Iranians in the
       U.S". The Iranian. Retrieved 2007-02-02.
   79. ^ See detailed analysis in: The U.S. Media and the Middle East:
       Image and Perception. Praeger, 1997; Greenwood, 1995.
   80. ^ Los Angeles Times: Essay: Iranians moving past negative
       depictions in pop culture: "Iranians, left outside of the 9/11
       conversation, began to leak fairly seamlessly into the best and
       worst of pop culture. In 2003, veteran Iranian actress Shohreh
       Aghadashloo starred in The House of Sand and Fog, for which she
       became the first Iranian nominated for an Academy Award (although
       two years later the pendulum swung back when she played a member of
       a terrorist family on the hit TV show 24)." June 27, 2010.
   81. ^ O'Connor, John J. (1986-05-18). "Tv View; 'On Wings Of Eagles'
       Plods To Superficial Heights". New York Times. Retrieved
       2013-02-16.
   82. ^ Escape from Iran: The Canadian Caper (1981) (TV)
   83. ^ Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural
       America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 277-283.
   84. ^ Rosten, Leo (1968) "The Joys of Yiddish"
   85. ^ Phagan, 1987, p. 27, states that "everyone knew the identity of
       the lynchers" (putting the words in her father's mouth). Oney,
       2003, p. 526, quotes Carl Abernathy as saying, "They'd go to a
       man's office and talk to him or ... see a man on the job and talk
       to him," and an unidentified lyncher as saying "The organization of
       the body was more open than mysterious."
   86. ^ ^a ^b Father Charles Edward Coughlin (1891-1971) By Richard
       Sanders, Editor, Press for Conversion!
   87. ^ "H-ANTISEMITISM OCCASIONAL PAPERS, NO. 1M". H-net.msu.edu.
       Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   88. ^ "Nation of Islam". Adl.org. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   89. ^ Seth Korelitz, "The Menorah Idea: From Religion to Culture, From
       Race to Ethnicity," American Jewish History 1997 85(1): 75–100.
       0164–0178
   90. ^ Peter Novick, The Holocaust in American Life (1999); Hilene
       Flanzbaum, ed. The Americanization of the Holocaust (1999); Monty
       Noam Penkower, "Shaping Holocaust Memory," American Jewish History
       2000 88(1): 127–132. 0164–0178
   91. ^ Steve Siporin, "Immigrant and Ethnic Family Folklore," Western
       States Jewish History 1990 22(3): 230–242. 0749–5471
   92. ^ M. Lerner, Village Voice, 1993
   93. ^ M. Lerner, Village Voice May 18, 1993
   94. ^ "Voices on Antisemitism Podcast". USHMM. Retrieved 4 January
       2014.
   95. ^ Sources for the following are:
          + Bauer, Yehuda. "Problems of Contemporary Anti-Semitism" at the
            Wayback Machine (archived July 5, 2003), 2003, retrieved April
            22, 2006.
          + Chesler, Phyllis. The New Anti-Semitism: The Current Crisis
            and What We Must Do About It, Jossey-Bass, 2003, pp. 158-159,
            181.
          + Doward, Jamie. Jews predict record level of hate attacks:
            Militant Islamic media accused of stirring up new wave of
            anti-semitism, The Guardian, August 8, 2004.
          + Kinsella, Warren. The New anti-Semitism, accessed March 5,
            2006.
          + Sacks, Jonathan. "The New Antisemitism", Ha'aretz, September
            6, 2002, retrieved on January 10, 2007.
          + Strauss, Mark. "Antiglobalism's Jewish Problem" in Rosenbaum,
            Ron (ed). Those who forget the past: The Question of
            Anti-Semitism, Random House 2004, p 272.
   96. ^ Noam Chomsky, Necessary Illusions, Appendix V, Segment 20
   97. ^ "Congressmember Weiner Gets It Wrong On Palestinian Group He
       Tried To Bar From U.S.". Democracy Now!. 2006-08-30.
   98. ^ "Real Stories From Victims Who've Been Scammed".
       gypsypsychicscams.com. Archived from the original on 26 August
       2007. Retrieved 26 August 2007.
   99. ^ Sutherland, Anne (1986). Gypsies: The Hidden Americans. Waveland
       Press. p. 86. ISBN 0881332356
       ISBN 978-0881332353
   100. ^ Mann, Charles C., 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before
       Columbus, Vintage Books, 2006, c.2005, p. 18
   101. ^ Brescia, William (Bill) (1982). "Chapter 2, French-Choctaw
       Contact, 1680s-1763". Tribal Government, A New Era. Philadelphia,
       Mississippi: Choctaw Heritage Press. p. 8.
   102. ^ Walter, Williams (1979). "Three Efforts at Development among the
       Choctaws of Mississippi". Southeastern Indians: Since the Removal
       Era. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press.
   103. ^ Hudson, Charles (1971). "The Ante-Bellum Elite". Red, White, and
       Black; Symposium on Indians in the Old South. University of Georgia
       Press. p. 80. SBN 820303089.
   104. ^ Castillo, Edward D. (1998). "Short Overview of California Indian
       History", California Native American Heritage Commission.
   105. ^ "Our Daily Bleed...". Retrieved 2008-01-28.
   106. ^ Ward Churchill, Kill the Indian, Save the Man, 2006. The basis
       for this theory was that inside every native person, there was a
       repressed white person screaming to come to the surface. Abuse both
       physical and psychological was common in these schools, and often
       their objective of 'compulsory whiteness' was not even ultimately
       achieved, with many of the Indians who later returned to the
       reservations afterwards not at all 'becoming white', but instead
       simply becoming heavy alcoholics and displaying signs of permanent
       psychological distress, and even mental illness. Further, these
       individuals were often either totally unemployable or only
       marginally employed, as it was sensed by those around them that on
       the one hand, they had not successfully assimilated into 'white
       society', nor were they any longer acceptable to the Indian
       societies from which they had originated.
   107. ^ Strasser, Franz; Carpenter, Sharon (November 22, 2010). "Native
       Americans battle teenage suicide". BBC News.
   108. ^ United States Senate, Oversight Hearing on Trust Fund
       Litigation, Cobell v. Kempthorne. See also, Cobell v. Norton.
   109. ^ Winona LaDuke, All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and
       Life, 1999, p. 2-3.
   110. ^ Perdue, Theda (2003). "Chapter 2 "Both White and Red"". Mixed
       Blood Indians: Racial Construction in the Early South. The
       University of Georgia Press. p. 51. ISBN 0-8203-2731-X.
   111. ^ Remini, Robert (1977, 1998). ""The Reform Begins"". Andrew
       Jackson. History Book Club. p. 201. ISBN 0-9650631-0-7.  Check date
       values in: |date= (help)
   112. ^ Miller, Eric (1994). "Washington and the Northwest War, Part
       One". George Washington And Indians. Eric Miller. Retrieved
       2008-05-02.
   113. ^ Kappler, Charles (1904). "Indian affairs: laws and treaties Vol.
       IV, Treaties". Government Printing Office. Retrieved 2008-10-14.
   114. ^ "Substance Abuse and Mental Health Publications| SAMHSA Store".
       Mentalhealth.samhsa.gov. 2011-11-19. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   115. ^ The Schedule of Racist Events: A Measure of Racial
       Discrimination and a Study of Its Negative Physical and Mental
       Health Consequences Journal of Black Psychology, Vol. 22, No. 2,
       144-168 (1996)
   116. ^ Kwate NO, Valdimarsdottir HB, Guevarra JS, Bovbjerg DH (June
       2003). "Experiences of racist events are associated with negative
       health consequences for African American women". J Natl Med Assoc
       95 (6): 450–60. PMC 2594553. PMID 12856911.
   117. ^ Blascovich J, Spencer SJ, Quinn D, Steele C (May 2001). "African
       Americans and high blood pressure: the role of stereotype threat".
       Psychol Sci 12 (3): 225–9. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00340.
       PMID 11437305.
   118. ^ Finch, Brian (2000). "Perceived Discrimination and Depression
       among Mexican-Origin Adults in California". Journal of Health and
       Social Behavior 41 (3): 309. doi:10.2307/2676322. Retrieved 5
       November 2013.
   119. ^ Kennedy BP, Kawachi I, Lochner K, Jones C, Prothrow-Stith D
       (1997). "(Dis)respect and black mortality". Ethn Dis 7 (3): 207–14.
       PMID 9467703.
   120. ^ ..
   121. ^ Hart KD, Kunitz SJ, Sell RR, Mukamel DB (March 1998).
       "Metropolitan governance, residential segregation, and mortality
       among African Americans". Am J Public Health 88 (3): 434–8.
       doi:10.2105/AJPH.88.3.434. PMC 1508338. PMID 9518976.
   122. ^ Jackson SA, Anderson RT, Johnson NJ, Sorlie PD (April 2000).
       "The relation of residential segregation to all-cause mortality: a
       study in black and white". Am J Public Health 90 (4): 615–7.
       doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.4.615. PMC 1446199. PMID 10754978.
   123. ^ THE CONCEPT OF NEIGHBORHOOD IN HEALTH AND MORTALITY RESEARCH
   124. ^ Cooper RS, Kennelly JF, Durazo-Arvizu R, Oh HJ, Kaplan G, Lynch
       J (2001). "Relationship between premature mortality and
       socioeconomic factors in black and white populations of US
       metropolitan areas". Public Health Rep 116 (5): 464–73.
       doi:10.1016/S0033-3549(04)50074-2. PMC 1497360. PMID 12042610.
   125. ^ ^a ^b Felicia R. Lee, "Protesting Demeaning Images in Media" New
       York Times November 5, 2007
   126. ^ Marissa Newhall, "Channeling Their Discontent, 500 Gather at
       Executive's D.C. Home to Protest Stereotypes," Washington Post,
       September 16, 2007
   127. ^ "Enough is Enough! Campaign". Enough is Enough! Campaign.
       2011-03-09. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   128. ^ "What About Our Daughters?". Whataboutourdaughters.com.
       Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   129. ^ Ford, Thomas (1997). "Effects of Stereotypical Television
       Portrayals of African-Americans on Person Perception". Social
       Psychology Quarterly 60 (3): 266. doi:10.2307/2787086. Retrieved 5
       November 2013.
   130. ^ Altschul, Inna; Daphna Oyserman and Deborah Bybee (September
       2008). "Racial-Ethnic Self-Schemas and Segmented Assimilation:
       Identity and the Academic Achievement of Hispanic Youth". Social
       Psychology Quarterly 71 (3): 303. doi:10.1177/019027250807100309.
       Retrieved 5 November 2013.  Cite uses deprecated parameters (help)
   131. ^ "Racial Violence against Asian Americans". Harvard Law Review
       106 (8). 1993. Retrieved 5 November 2013.
   132. ^ Wilkerson, Isabel (17 April 1988). "Campus Blacks Feel Racism's
       Nuances". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 November 2013.
   133. ^ For example, Catherine A. Hansman, Leon Spencer, Dale Grant,
       Mary Jackson, "Beyond Diversity: Dismantling Barriers in
       Education," Journal of Instructional Psychology, March 1999
   134. ^ Andrew Blankstein And Joel Rubin. L.A.'s top cops at odds:
       William Bratton, Lee Baca disagree on role of race in gang
       violence. Los Angeles Times, June 13, 2008.
   135. ^ "Race relations | Where black and brown collide". Economist.com.
       2007-08-02. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   136. ^ February 11, 2009, 5:52 PM (2009-02-11). "Riot Breaks Out At
       Calif. High School, Melee Involving 500 People Erupts At Southern
       California School". Cbsnews.com. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   137. ^ "California Prisons on Alert After Weekend Violence". NPR.
       2006-02-06. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   138. ^ Paul Harris (2007-03-18). "A bloody conflict between Black and
       Hispanic gangs is spreading across Los Angeles".
       Observer.guardian.co.uk. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   139. ^ The Hutchinson Report: Thanks to Latino Gangs, There's a Zone in
       L.A. Where Blacks Risk Death if They Enter^[dead link]
   140. ^ [2]^[dead link]
   141. ^ JURIST - Paper Chase: Race riot put down at California state
       prison
   142. ^ Racial segregation continues in California prisons^[dead link]
   143. ^ "African immigrants face bias from blacks". Post-gazette.com.
       1969-12-31. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   144. ^ "Racism not always black and white". Abcnews.go.com. 2008-06-25.
       Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   145. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Brown, Darryl (March 1990). "Racism and Race
       Relations in the University". Virginia Law Review 76 (2).
   146. ^ What is Institutional and Structural Racism? ERASE RACISM
   147. ^ Bullock III, C. S. & Rodgers Jr., H. R. (1976) "Institutional
       Racism: Prerequisites, Freezing, and Mapping". Phylon 37 (3),
       212-223.
   148. ^ Roman Catholics and Immigration in Nineteenth-Century America by
       Julie Byrne, Dept. of Religion, Duke University, National
       Humanities Center
   149. ^ "Chinese Exclusion Act (1882)". Ourdocuments.gov. 1968-07-01.
       Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   150. ^ Immigration Act of 1924 HistoricalDocuments.com
   151. ^ Lowell, Lindsay (November 1995). "Unintended Consequences of
       Immigration Reform: Discrimination and HIspanic Employment".
       Demography 32 (4): 617. doi:10.2307/2061678. Retrieved 5 November
       2013.
   152. ^ "Wealth gap widens: Whites' net worth is 20 times that of
       blacks". CSMonitor.com. 2011-07-26. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
   153. ^ "Census report: Broad racial disparities persist", November 14,
       2006.
   154. ^ George Lipsitz, "The Possessive Investment in Whiteness:
       Racialized Social Democracy and the "White" Problem in American
       Studies," American Quarterly, Vol. 47, No. 3. (September 1995), pp.
       369-387.
   155. ^ Woolf SH, Johnson RE, Fryer GE, Rust G, Satcher D (December
       2004). "The health impact of resolving racial disparities: an
       analysis of US mortality data". Am J Public Health 94 (12):
       2078–81. doi:10.2105/AJPH.94.12.2078. PMC 1448594. PMID 15569956.
   156. ^ "The History of Black 'Paranoia'", ch. 3 of Alexander Cockburn
       and Jeffrey St. Clair, Whiteout: The CIA, Drugs, and the Press,
       London: Verso, 1998.
   157. ^ Bhopal R (June 1998). "Spectre of racism in health and health
       care: lessons from history and the United States". BMJ 316 (7149):
       1970–3. doi:10.1136/bmj.316.7149.1970. PMC 1113412. PMID 9641943.
   158. ^ Oberman A, Cutter G (September 1984). "Issues in the natural
       history and treatment of coronary heart disease in black
       populations: surgical treatment". Am. Heart J. 108 (3 Pt 2):
       688–94. doi:10.1016/0002-8703(84)90656-2. PMID 6332513.
   159. ^ Kjellstrand CM (June 1988). "Age, sex, and race inequality in
       renal transplantation". Arch. Intern. Med. 148 (6): 1305–9.
       doi:10.1001/archinte.148.6.1305. PMID 3288159.
   160. ^ Mayer WJ, McWhorter WP (June 1989). "Black/white differences in
       non-treatment of bladder cancer patients and implications for
       survival". Am J Public Health 79 (6): 772–5.
       doi:10.2105/AJPH.79.6.772. PMC 1349641. PMID 2729474.
   161. ^ Yergan J, Flood AB, LoGerfo JP, Diehr P (July 1987).
       "Relationship between patient race and the intensity of hospital
       services". Med Care 25 (7): 592–603.
       doi:10.1097/00005650-198707000-00003. PMID 3695664.
   162. ^ , (May 1990). "Black-white disparities in health care". JAMA 263
       (17): 2344–6. doi:10.1001/jama.263.17.2344. PMID 2182918.
   163. ^ ^a ^b Valentino, Nicholas (March 2002). "Cues that Matter: How
       Political Ads Prime Racial Attitudes during Campaigns". The
       American Political Science Review 96 (1): 83.
       doi:10.1017/s0003055402004240. Retrieved 5 November 2013.
   164. ^ Bill Quigley (2010-07-26). "Fourteen Examples of Racism in
       Criminal Justice System".  Missing or empty |url= (help)
   165. ^ Hate Crime Statistics, 2004. Hate Crime Statistics, 2005.
   166. ^ "Hate Crime Victimization, 2003-2011". Bureau of Justice
       Statistics. Retrieved 30 August 2014.
   167. ^ Hate Crime Reported by Victims and Police, Bureau of Justice
       Statistics Special Report, November 2005, NCJ 209911.
   168. ^ The Color of Crime, 1999.
   169. ^ Preface to Minnesota's official crime data reports, quoted in
       Southern Poverty Law Center, Coloring Crime.
   170. ^ Tim Wise, "The Color of Deception: Race, Crime and Sloppy Social
       Science," 2004.
   171. ^ Southern Poverty Law Center, Coloring Crime.
   172. ^ "ADL poll: Anti-Semitic attitudes on rise in USA". The Jerusalem
       Post. November 3, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
   173. ^ "Aquí Se Habla Español – and Two-Thirds Don’t Mind". ABC News.
       Oct 8, 2007. Retrieved Dec 20, 2013.
   174. ^ ^a ^b Babington, Charles (September 22, 2008). "Poll: Views
       still differ sharply by race". Fox News Channel. Retrieved January
       16, 2010. "[A] new Associated Press-Yahoo News poll, conducted with
       Stanford University, shows ... that a substantial portion of white
       Americans still harbor negative feelings toward blacks."


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Racism in the Americas
     * North America
     * South America

   Sovereign states
     * Antigua and Barbuda
     * Argentina
     * Bahamas
     * Barbados
     * Belize
     * Bolivia
     * Brazil
     * Canada
     * Chile
     * Colombia
     * Costa Rica
     * Cuba
     * Dominica
     * Dominican Republic
     * Ecuador
     * El Salvador
     * Grenada
     * Guatemala
     * Guyana
     * Haiti
     * Honduras
     * Jamaica
     * Mexico
     * Nicaragua
     * Panama
     * Paraguay
     * Peru
     * Saint Kitts and Nevis
     * Saint Lucia
     * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
     * Suriname
     * Trinidad and Tobago
     * United States
     * Uruguay
     * Venezuela

   Americas (orthographic projection).svg
   Dependencies and
   other territories
     * Anguilla
     * Aruba
     * Bermuda
     * Bonaire
     * British Virgin Islands
     * Cayman Islands
     * Curaçao
     * Falkland Islands
     * French Guiana
     * Greenland
     * Guadeloupe
     * Martinique
     * Montserrat
     * Navassa Island
     * Puerto Rico
     * Saint Barthélemy
     * Saint Martin
     * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
     * Saba
     * Sint Eustatius
     * Sint Maarten
     * South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
     * Turks and Caicos Islands
     * US Virgin Islands


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Life in the United States
     * Affluence
     * Crime
     * Culture
     * Economic issues
     * Education (attainment)
     * Family structure
     * Health care
     * Health insurance
     * Holidays
     * Income (Household
     * Personal)
     * Income inequality
     * Homelessness
     * Homeownership
     * Human rights
     * Labor unions
     * Languages
     * Middle class
     * Passenger vehicle transport
     * Political ideologies
     * Poverty
     * Race
     * Religion
     * Social class
     * Society
     * Sports
     * Standard of living
     * Wealth


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Demographics of the United States
   Demographic history
   Economic and social
     * Affluence
     * Educational attainment
     * Emigration
     * Homeownership
     * Household income
     * Immigration
     * Income inequality
     * Language
     * LGBT
     * Middle classes
     * Personal income
     * Poverty
     * Social class
     * Unemployment by state
     * Wealth

   Religion
     * Prominent examples: Buddhists
     * Christians
          + Catholics
          + Protestants, etc.
     * Hindus
     * Jainism
     * Jews
     * Muslims
     * Neopagans
     * Non-religious
     * Sikhs

   Race and ethnicity
     * People of the United States/Americans
     * Ethnic groups in the United States
     * American people by ethnic or national origin
     * History of the United States by ethnic group
     * American culture by ethnicity
     * Race and ethnicity in the Census
     * Maps of American ancestries
     * American ethnicity
     * 2010 Census
     * in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
     * Racism

     * - African immigrants to the United States
          + Central Africans in the United States
          + Horn Africans in the United States
          + North Africans in the United States
          + Southeast Africans in the United States
          + Southern Africans in the United States
          + West Africans in the United States
     * - White Americans: European Americans
          + English Americans
          + German Americans
          + Irish Americans
          + Italian Americans
          + French Americans
          + Basque Americans, etc.
     * Euro Oceanic American
          + Australian American, New Zealand American
     * Non-Hispanic Whites
     * White Hispanic and Latino Americans
     * Middle Eastern Americans
          + Arab Americans
          + Israeli Americans
          + Iranian Americans
     * - Afro-American peoples of the Americas
          + African Americans
          + Afro-Caribbean/West Indian Americans,
          + Black Hispanic and Latino Americans
     * - Asian Americans
          + Chinese Americans
          + Filipino Americans
          + Indian Americans
          + Vietnamese Americans
          + Japanese Americans
          + Pakistani Americans
          + Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans, etc.
     * - Americans from other parts of the Americas: Canadian
     * Hispanic and Latino Americans
          + Mexican Americans
          + Puerto Ricans (Stateside)
          + Cuban Americans
          + Colombian Americans, etc.
     * Belizean American
     * Guyanese American
     * Native Americans and Alaska Natives
     * - Oceanic American: Euro Oceanic and Pacific Islands Americans
          + Chamorro Americans
          + Native Hawaiians
          + Samoan Americans
          + Tongan Americans, etc.
     * - Others ethnic groups
          + Melungeon
          + Roma in the United States
     * Multiracial Americans


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


                                      * v
  * t
  * e

Racism
History of racism
                    * Racial Equality Proposal
                    * Civil rights movement
                    * Apartheid in South Africa

Racist ideologies
                    * Aryanism
                    * Black supremacy
                    * Discrimination
                    * Kahanism
                    * Malay supremacy
                    * Nazism
                    * Neo-Nazism
                    * Sinocentrism
                    * White supremacy

  Acts of racism
                    * Crime of apartheid
                    * Hate group
                    * Hate speech
                    * Institutional racism
                    * Interminority racism
                    * Racial segregation
                    * Scientific racism
                    * Segregation academy
                    * Slavery
                    * State racism

 Racial violence
                    * Ethnic cleansing
                    * Genocide
                    * Hate crime
                    * Lynching
                    * Race war

  Racism against
groups
                    * Anglophobia
                    * Anti-Arabism
                    * Anti-Armenianism
                    * Anti-Australian sentiment
                    * Anti-British sentiment
                    * Anti-Chinese sentiment
                    * Anti-Filipino sentiment
                    * Anti-German sentiment
                    * Anti-Iranian sentiment
                    * Anti-Irish sentiment
                    * Anti-Italianism
                    * Anti-Japanese sentiment
                    * Anti-Korean sentiment
                    * Anti-Mexican sentiment
                    * Anti-Pakistan sentiment
                    * Anti-Pashtun sentiment
                    * Anti-Polish sentiment
                    * Anti-Quebec sentiment
                    * Racial antisemitism
                    * Anti-Romanian sentiment
                    * Anti-Slavism
                    * Anti-Turkism
                    * Anti-Ukrainian sentiment
                    * Antiziganism
                    * Francophobia
                    * Hispanophobia
                    * Indophobia
                    * Lusophobia
                    * Russophobia
                    * Xenophobia

  Racist groups
                    * Heathen Front
                    * Kach and Kahane Chai
                    * Ku Klux Klan
                    * Aryan Nations
                    * National Party of South Africa
                    * New Black Panther Party
                    * Nation of Islam
                    * Zaitokukai
                    * SPLC list

 Racism by region
                    * Africa
                    * Arab world
                    * Asia
                    * Europe
                    * Middle East

Anti-racist groups
and movements
                    * Anti-Defamation League
                    * Anti-Fascist Action
                    * Anti-racism
                    * Civil rights movement
                    * Diversity/Multiculturalism
                    * Fighting Discrimination/Human Rights First
                    * National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
                    * Searchlight
                    * Southern Poverty Law Center

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racism_in_the_United_States&
   oldid=625977899"
   Categories:
     * Racism in the United States
     * Racism by country

   Hidden categories:
     * Pages using web citations with no URL
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from February 2013
     * CS1 errors: dates
     * Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters
     * Articles with dead external links from November 2011
     * NPOV disputes from March 2014
     * All NPOV disputes
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014
     * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014
     * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014
     * All accuracy disputes
     * Articles with disputed statements from May 2014
     * Articles with attributed pull quotes
     * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012
     * Wikipedia references cleanup from September 2009
     * All articles needing references cleanup
     * Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2009
     * All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Español
     * فارسی
     * Italiano
     * 日本語
     * Русский
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 17 September 2014 at 18:10.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
