   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Southern United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   This article is about the cultural region. For the geographically
   southern part of the United States, see Sun Belt.
   The Southern United States as defined by the United States Census
   Bureau.^[1] The "South" and its regions are defined in various ways,
   however. (See Geography section.)

   The Southern United States—commonly referred to as the American South,
   Dixie, or simply the South—is a region of the United States of America.
   The South does not match the geographic south, but is predominantly
   located in the southeastern corner; Arizona, which is geographically in
   the southern part of the country, is rarely considered part of the
   Southern United States, while West Virginia commonly is.

   Usually, the South is defined as including the southeastern and
   south-central United States. The region is known for its culture and
   history, having developed its own customs, musical styles and cuisines
   that have distinguished it in some ways from the rest of the United
   States. The Southern ethnic heritage is diverse and includes strong
   European (mostly English, Irish, Scotch-Irish and Scottish), African,
   and some Native American components.^[2] Several Southern states
   (Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia) were
   English Colonies that sent delegates to sign the Declaration of
   Independence and then fought against the English along with the
   Northern Colonists during the Revolutionary War. The basis for much
   Southern culture derives from the pride in these states being among the
   13 original colonies, and from the fact that much of the population of
   the South has strong ancestral links to Colonists who emigrated west.
   Southern manners and customs reflect the relationship with England and
   Africa that was held by the early population, with some influences
   being provided by the Native American populations of the area.^[3]

   Some other aspects of the historical and cultural development of the
   South have been influenced by an early support for the doctrine of
   states' rights, the institution of slave labor on plantations in the
   Lower South to an extent seen nowhere else in the United States; the
   presence of a large proportion of African Americans in the population;
   and the legacy of the Civil War and Reconstruction Era, as seen in
   thousands of lynchings (mostly from 1880 to 1930), the segregated
   system of separate schools and public facilities known as "Jim Crow",
   that lasted until the 1960s, and the widespread use of poll taxes and
   other methods to frequently deny blacks of the right to vote or hold
   office until the 1960s. In more modern times, however, the South has
   become the most integrated region of the country. Since the late 1960s
   blacks have held and currently hold many high offices, such as mayor
   and police chief, in many cities such as Atlanta and New Orleans.^[4]

   Historically, the South relied heavily on agriculture, and was highly
   rural until after 1945. It has since become more industrialized and
   urban and has attracted national and international migrants. The
   American South is now among the fastest-growing areas in the United
   States. Sociological research indicates that Southern collective
   identity stems from political, demographic, and cultural
   distinctiveness from the rest of the United States. The region contains
   the Bible Belt, an area of high church attendance (especially in
   Evangelical churches such as the Southern Baptist Convention) and
   predominantly conservative, religion-influenced politics. Indeed,
   studies have shown that Southerners are more conservative than
   non-Southerners in several areas, including religion, morality,
   international relations and race relations.^[5]^[6] This is evident in
   both the region's religious attendance figures and in the region's
   usually strong support for the Republican Party in political elections
   since the 1960s.^[5]^[6]

   Overall, the South has had lower percentages of high school graduates,
   lower housing values, lower household incomes, and lower cost of living
   than the rest of the United States.^[7] These factors, combined with
   the fact that Southerners have continued to maintain strong loyalty to
   family ties, has led some sociologists to label white Southerners a
   "quasi-ethnic regional group".^[8] In previous censuses, the largest
   ancestry group identified by Southerners was English or mostly
   English,^[9]^[10]^[11] with 19,618,370 self-reporting "English" as an
   ancestry on the 1980 census, followed by 12,709,872 listing "Irish" and
   11,054,127 "Afro-American".^[9]^[10]^[11] Almost a third of all
   Americans who claim English ancestry can be found in the American
   South, and over a quarter of all Southerners claim English descent as
   well.^[12] The South also continues to have the highest percentage of
   African Americans in the country, predominantely due to historical and
   economic factors.

   Apart from its climate, the living experience in the South increasingly
   resembles the rest of the nation. The arrival of millions of
   Northerners (especially in major metropolitan areas and coastal
   areas)^[13] and millions of Hispanics^[14] means the introduction of
   cultural values and social norms not rooted in Southern
   traditions.^[15]^[16] Observers conclude that collective identity and
   Southern distinctiveness are thus declining, particularly when defined
   against "an earlier South that was somehow more authentic, real, more
   unified and distinct".^[17] The process has worked both ways, however,
   with aspects of Southern culture spreading throughout a greater portion
   of the rest of the United States in a process termed
   "Southernization".^[18]

Contents

     * 1 Geography
     * 2 History
          + 2.1 Native American culture
          + 2.2 European colonization
          + 2.3 American Revolution
          + 2.4 Antebellum years
          + 2.5 Civil War
          + 2.6 Reconstruction and Jim Crow
          + 2.7 Late 19th and 20th century—industrialization and Great
            Migration
          + 2.8 Presidential history
          + 2.9 Growth and poverty
     * 3 Economy
     * 4 Education
     * 5 Culture
     * 6 Health
     * 7 Politics
          + 7.1 Other politicians and political movements
     * 8 Race relations
          + 8.1 Native Americans
          + 8.2 Civil rights
     * 9 Symbolism
     * 10 Major metropolitan areas
     * 11 Major combined statistical areas
     * 12 See also
     * 13 Notes
     * 14 References
     * 15 Further reading
     * 16 External links

Geography[edit]

   Texas Hill Country

   The question of how to define the subregions in the South has been the
   focus of research for nearly a century.^[19]^[20]
   Bluegrass region in Kentucky
   Glass Mountains at Glass Mountains State Park, Oklahoma
   A field of yellow wildflowers in Saint Bernard Parish, Louisiana
   North Carolina's Appalachian Mountains
   Pearl River backwater in Mississippi
   Misty Bluff along the Buffalo River, Ozark Mountains, Arkansas
   Cherry River in West Virginia

   As defined by the United States Census Bureau,^[1] the Southern region
   of the United States includes sixteen states. As of 2010, an estimated
   114,555,744 people, or thirty-seven percent of all U.S. residents,
   lived in the South, the nation's most populous region.^[21] The Census
   Bureau defined three smaller units, or divisions:
     * The South Atlantic States: Florida, Georgia, Maryland, North
       Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, and Delaware
     * The East South Central States: Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi and
       Tennessee
     * The West South Central States: Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and
       Texas.

   The Council of State Governments, an organization for communication and
   coordination between states, includes in its South regional office the
   states of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana,
   Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina,
   Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia.^[22]

   Other terms related to the South include:
     * The Old South: can mean either the slave states that existed in
       1776 (Virginia, Delaware, Maryland, Georgia, North Carolina, and
       South Carolina),;^[23] or all the slave states before 1860 (which
       included the newer states of Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Florida,
       Mississippi, Missouri, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas).^[24]
     * The New South: usually including the South Atlantic States.^[25]
     * The Solid South: region controlled by the Democratic Party from
       1877 to 1964. Includes at least all the 11 former Confederate
       States.^[26]
     * Southern Appalachia: mainly refers to areas situated in the
       Southern Appalachian Mountains, namely Eastern Kentucky, East
       Tennessee, Western North Carolina, Western Maryland, West Virginia,
       Southwest Virginia, North Georgia, and Northwestern South
       Carolina.^[27]
     * Southeastern United States: usually including the Carolinas, the
       Virginias, Tennessee, Kentucky, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi,
       Florida and at times Maryland and Delaware.^[28]
     * The Deep South: various definitions, usually including Louisiana,
       Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia, and South Carolina. Occasionally,
       parts of adjoining states are included (sections of East Texas, the
       Mississippi embayment areas of Arkansas and Tennessee, and northern
       and central Florida).^[29]
     * The Gulf South: various definitions, usually including Gulf coasts
       of Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, Texas and Alabama.
     * The Upper South: Kentucky, Virginia, West Virginia, Tennessee,
       North Carolina, and occasionally Missouri, Maryland, and
       Delaware.^[30]
     * Dixie: various definitions, but most commonly associated with the
       11 states of the Old Confederacy.
     * The Mid-South: Various definitions, including that of the Census
       Bureau of the East and West South Central United States;^[31] in
       another informal definition, Tennessee, Arkansas, Mississippi, and
       sometimes adjoining areas of other states.^[32]^[33]^[34]^[35]
     * Border South: Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware were
       states on the outer rim of the Confederacy that did not secede from
       the United States, but did have significant numbers of residents
       who joined the Confederate armed forces. Kentucky and Missouri had
       Confederate governments in exile and were represented in the
       Confederate Congress and by stars on the Confederate battle flag.
       West Virginia was formed in 1863 after the western region of
       Virginia broke away to protest the Old Dominion's joining of the
       Confederacy, but residents of the new state were about evenly
       divided on supporting the Union or the Confederacy.^[36]

   The popular definition of the "South" is more informal and generally
   associated with the 11 states that seceded during the Civil War to form
   the Confederate States of America.^[37] Those states share
   commonalities of history and culture that carry on to the present day.
   Oklahoma is often included; it was not a state, but all its major
   Native American tribes signed formal treaties of alliance with the
   Confederacy.^[citation needed]

   The South is a diverse meteorological region with numerous climatic
   zones, including temperate, sub-tropical, tropical, and arid—though the
   South is generally regarded as hot and humid, with long summers and
   short, mild winters. Most of the south—except for the higher elevations
   and areas near the western, southern and some northern fringes—fall in
   the humid subtropical climate zone. Crops grow easily in the South; its
   climate consistently provides growing seasons of at least six months
   before the first frost. Landscapes, particularly in the Southeast, are
   characterized by live oaks, Lagerstroemia indica, Nandina domestica,
   camellias, southern magnolia trees, yellow jessamine vines, Spanish
   moss, cabbage palms and flowering dogwoods. Another common environment
   is found in the bayous and swamplands of the Gulf Coast, especially in
   Louisiana and Texas. Parts of the rural South have been overrun by
   kudzu, an invasive, fast-growing, leafy vine that can spread over
   trees, land, roads, and buildings, choking and killing indigenous
   plants. Kudzu is a particularly severe problem in the Piedmont regions
   of South Carolina, Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia.^[38]

History[edit]

   Main article: History of the Southern United States

Native American culture[edit]

   The first well-dated evidence of human occupation in the south United
   States occurs around 9500 BC with the appearance of the earliest
   documented Americans, who are now referred to as Paleo-Indians.^[39]
   Paleoindians were hunter-gathers that roamed in bands and frequently
   hunted megafauna. Several cultural stages, such as Archaic (ca.
   8000-1000 BC) and the Woodland (ca. 1000 BC - AD 1000), preceded what
   the Europeans found at the end of the 15th century—the Mississippian
   culture.^[39]

   The Mississippian culture was a complex, mound-building Native American
   culture that flourished in what is now the southeastern United States
   from approximately 800 AD to 1500 AD. Natives had elaborate and lengthy
   trading routes connecting their main residential and ceremonial centers
   extending through the river valleys and from the East Coast to the
   Great Lakes.^[39] Some noted explorers who encountered and described
   the Mississippian culture, by then in decline, included Pánfilo de
   Narváez (1528), Hernando de Soto (1540), and Pierre Le Moyne
   d'Iberville (1699).

   Native American descendants of the mound-builders include Alabama,
   Apalachee, Caddo, Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Guale, Hitchiti,
   Houma, and Seminole peoples, all of whom still reside in the South.

   Other peoples whose ancestral links to the Mississippian culture are
   less clear but were clearly in the region before the European incursion
   include the Catawba and the Powhatan.

European colonization[edit]

   European immigration resulted in a corresponding die off of native
   Americans who had not been exposed to various diseases.^[40]

   The predominant culture of the South was rooted in the settlement of
   the region by British colonists. In the 17th century, most voluntary
   immigrants were of English origins who settled chiefly along the
   coastal regions of the Eastern seaboard but had pushed as far inland as
   the Appalachian mountains by the 18th century. The majority of early
   English settlers were indentured servants, who gained freedom after
   enough work to pay off their passage. The wealthier men who paid their
   way received land grants known as headrights, to encourage
   settlement.^[41]

   The Spanish and French established colonies in Florida, Texas, and
   Louisiana. The Spanish colonized Florida in the 16th century, with
   their communities reaching a peak in the late 17th century.
   Benjamin Hawkins, seen here on his plantation, teaches Creek Native
   Americans how to use European technology. Painted in 1805.

   In the British colonies, immigration began in 1607 and continued until
   the outbreak of the Revolution in 1775. Settlers cleared land, built
   houses and outbuildings, and on their own farms. The rich owned large
   plantations that dominated export agriculture and used black slaves.
   Many were involved in the labor-intensive cultivation of tobacco, the
   first cash crop of Virginia. Tobacco exhausted the soil quickly,
   requiring that farmers regularly clear new fields. They used old fields
   as pasture, and for crops such as corn and wheat, or allowed them to
   grow into woodlots.^[42]

   In the mid-to-late-18th century, large groups of Ulster-Scots (later
   called the Scotch-Irish) and people from the Anglo-Scottish border
   region immigrated and settled in the back country of Appalachia and the
   Piedmont. They were the largest group of non-English immigrants from
   the British Isles before the American Revolution.^[43] In the 1980
   Census, 34% of Southerners reported that they were of English ancestry;
   English was the largest reported European ancestry in every Southern
   state by a large margin.^[9]

   The early colonists engaged in warfare, trade, and cultural exchanges.
   Those living in the backcountry were more likely to encounter Creek
   Indians, Cherokee, and Choctaws and other regional native groups.

   The oldest university in the South, The College of William & Mary, was
   founded in 1693 in Virginia; it pioneered in the teaching of political
   economy and educated future U.S. Presidents Jefferson, Monroe and
   Tyler, all from Virginia. Indeed, the entire region dominated politics
   in the First Party System era: for example, four of the first five
   presidents—Washington, Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe—were from
   Virginia. The two oldest public universities are also in the South: the
   University of North Carolina (1789) and the University of Georgia
   (1785).

American Revolution[edit]

   Main article: Southern theater of the American Revolutionary War
   1st Maryland Regiment holding the line at the Battle of Guilford in
   North Carolina.

   With Virginia in the lead, the Southern colonies embraced the American
   Revolution, providing such leaders as commander in chief George
   Washington, and the author of the Declaration of Independence, Thomas
   Jefferson.

   In 1780–81, the British largely halted reconquest of the northern
   states, and concentrated on the south, where they were told there was a
   large Loyalist population ready to leap to arms once the royal forces
   arrived. The British took control of Savannah and Charleston, capturing
   a large American army in the process, and set up a network of bases
   inland. There were many more Loyalists in the South than in the
   North,^[44] but they were concentrated in larger coastal cities and
   were not great enough in number to overcome the revolutionaries. Large
   numbers of loyalists from South Carolina fought for the British in the
   Battle of Camden. The British forces at the Battle of Monck's Corner
   and the Battle of Lenud's Ferry consisted entirely of Loyalists with
   the exception of the commanding officer (Banastre Tarleton).^[45] Both
   white and black Loyalists fought for the British at the Battle of
   Kemp's Landing in Virginia.^[46]^[47] Led by Nathanael Greene and other
   generals, the Americans engaged in Fabian tactics designed to wear down
   the British invasion force, and to neutralize its strong points one by
   one. There were numerous battles large and small, with each side
   claiming some victories. By 1781, however, British General Cornwallis
   moved north to Virginia, where an approaching army forced him to
   fortify and await rescue by the British Navy. The British Navy did
   arrive, but so did a stronger French fleet, and Cornwallis was trapped.
   American and French armies, led by Washington, forced Cornwallis to
   surrender his entire army in Yorktown, Virginia in October 1781,
   effectively winning the North American part of the war.^[48]

   The Revolution provided a shock to slavery in the South. Thousands of
   slaves took advantage of wartime disruption to find their own freedom,
   catalyzed by the British Governor Dunmore of Virginia's promise of
   freedom for service. Many others were removed by Loyalist owners and
   became slaves elsewhere in the Empire. Between 1770 and 1790, there was
   a sharp decline in the percentage of blacks – from 61% percent to 44%
   in South Carolina and from 45% to 36% in Georgia.^[49]

   In addition, some slaveholders were inspired to free their slaves after
   the Revolution. They were moved by the principles of the Revolution,
   and Quaker and Methodist preachers worked to encourage slaveholders to
   free their slaves. Planters such as George Washington often freed
   slaves by their wills. In the upper South, more than 10 percent of all
   blacks were free by 1810, a significant expansion from pre-war
   proportions of less than 1 percent free.^[50]

Antebellum years[edit]

   Slaves on a South Carolina plantation (The Old Plantation, c. 1790)

   Cotton became dominant in the lower South after 1800. After the
   invention of the cotton gin, short staple cotton could be grown more
   widely. This led to an explosion of cotton cultivation, especially in
   the frontier uplands of Georgia, Alabama and other parts of the Deep
   South, as well as riverfront areas of the Mississippi Delta. Migrants
   poured into those areas in the early decades of the 19th century, when
   county population figures rose and fell as swells of people kept moving
   west. The expansion of cotton cultivation required more slave labor,
   and the institution became even more deeply an integral part of the
   South's economy.^[51]

   With the opening up of frontier lands after the government forced most
   Native Americans to move west of the Mississippi, there was a major
   migration of both whites and blacks to those territories. From the
   1820s through the 1850s, more than one million enslaved Africans were
   transported to the Deep South in forced migration, two-thirds of them
   by slave traders and the others by masters who moved there. Planters in
   the Upper South sold slaves excess to their needs as they shifted from
   tobacco to mixed agriculture. Many enslaved families were broken up, as
   planters preferred mostly strong males for field work.^[52]

   Two major political issues that festered in the first half of the 19th
   century caused political alignment along sectional lines, strengthened
   the identities of North and South as distinct regions with certain
   strongly opposed interests, and fed the arguments over states' rights
   that culminated in secession and the Civil War. One of these issues
   concerned the protective tariffs enacted to assist the growth of the
   manufacturing sector, primarily in the North. In 1832, in resistance to
   federal legislation increasing tariffs, South Carolina passed an
   ordinance of nullification, a procedure in which a state would, in
   effect, repeal a Federal law. Soon a naval flotilla was sent to
   Charleston harbor, and the threat of landing ground troops was used to
   compel the collection of tariffs. A compromise was reached by which the
   tariffs would be gradually reduced, but the underlying argument over
   states' rights continued to escalate in the following decades.
   Horse racing at Jacksonville, Alabama, 1841

   The second issue concerned slavery, primarily the question of whether
   slavery would be permitted in newly admitted states. The issue was
   initially finessed by political compromises designed to balance the
   number of "free" and "slave" states. The issue resurfaced in more
   virulent form, however, around the time of the Mexican–American War,
   which raised the stakes by adding new territories primarily on the
   Southern side of the imaginary geographic divide. Congress opposed
   allowing slavery in these territories.

   Before the Civil War, the number of immigrants arriving at Southern
   ports began to increase, although the North continued to receive the
   most immigrants. Hugenots were among the first settlers in Charleston,
   along with the largest number of Hasidic Jews outside of New York
   City.^[citation needed] Numerous Irish immigrants settled in New
   Orleans, establishing a distinct ethnic enclave now known as the Irish
   Channel. Germans also went to New Orleans and its environs, resulting
   in a large area north of the city (along the Mississippi) becoming
   known as the German Coast; however, still greater numbers immigrated to
   Texas (especially after 1848), where many bought land and were farmers.
   Many more German immigrants arrived in Texas after the Civil War, where
   they created the brewing industry in Houston and elsewhere, became
   grocers in numerous cities, and also established wide areas of farming.

Civil War[edit]

   Main articles: American Civil War and Confederate States of America
   map of United States with southeastern states highlighted in shades of
   red
   Historic Southern United States. The states in red were in the
   Confederacy and have historically been regarded as forming "the South".
   Those in stripes were considered "border states", and gave varying
   degrees of support to the Southern cause although they remained in the
   Union. (This image depicts the original, trans-Allegheny borders of
   Virginia, and so does not show West Virginia separately. See the images
   above for post-1863 Virginia and West Virginia borders.) Although
   Oklahoma was aligned with the Confederacy, it is not shaded because at
   the time the region was Indian Territory, not a state.

   By 1856, the South had lost control of Congress, and was no longer able
   to silence calls for an end to slavery—which came mostly from the more
   populated, free states of the North. The Republican Party, founded in
   1854, pledged to stop the spread of slavery beyond those states where
   it already existed. After Abraham Lincoln was elected the first
   Republican president in 1860, seven cotton states declared their
   secession and formed the Confederate States of America before Lincoln
   was inaugurated. The United States government, both outgoing and
   incoming, refused to recognize the Confederacy, and when the new
   Confederate President Jefferson Davis ordered his troops to open fire
   on Fort Sumter in April 1861, there was an overwhelming demand, North
   and South, for war. Only the state of Kentucky attempted to remain
   neutral, and it could only do so briefly. When Lincoln called for
   troops to suppress what he referred to as "combinations too powerful to
   be suppressed by the ordinary" judicial or martial means,^[53] four
   more states decided to secede and join the Confederacy (which then
   moved its capital to Richmond, Virginia). Although the Confederacy had
   large supplies of captured munitions and many volunteers, it was slower
   than the Union in dealing with the border states. By March 1862, the
   Union largely controlled Maryland, West Virginia, Kentucky and
   Missouri, had shut down all commercial traffic from all Confederate
   ports, had prevented European recognition of the Confederate
   government, and was poised to seize New Orleans.
   Confederate dead of General Ewell's Corps who attacked the Union lines
   at the Battle of Spotsylvania, May 19, 1864.

   In the four years of war 1861–65 the South was the primary
   battleground, with all but two of the major battles taking place on
   Southern soil. Union forces relentlessly squeezed the Confederacy,
   controlling the border states in 1861, the Tennessee River, the
   Cumberland River and New Orleans in 1862, and the Mississippi River in
   1863. In the East, however, the rebel army under Robert E. Lee beat off
   attack after attack in its defense of their capital at Richmond. But
   when Lee tried to move north, he was repulsed (and nearly captured) at
   Sharpsburg (1862) and Gettysburg (1863).

   The Confederacy had the resources for a short war, but was unable to
   finance or supply a longer war. It reversed the traditional low-tariff
   policy of the South by imposing a new 15% tax on all imports from the
   Union. The Union blockade stopped most commerce from entering the
   South, and smugglers avoided the tax, so the Confederate tariff
   produced too little revenue to finance the war. Inflated currency was
   the solution, but that created distrust of the Richmond government.
   Because of low investment in railroads, the Southern transportation
   system depended primarily on river and coastal traffic by boat; both
   were shut down by the Union Navy. The small railroad system virtually
   collapsed, so that by 1864 internal travel was so difficult that the
   Confederate economy was crippled.

   The Confederate cause was hopeless by the time Atlanta fell and William
   T. Sherman marched through Georgia in late 1864, but the rebels fought
   on, refusing to give up their independence until Lee's army was
   captured in April 1865. All the Confederate forces surrendered, and
   there was no insurgency as the region moved into the Reconstruction
   Era.

   The South suffered much more than the North overall, as the Union
   strategy of attrition warfare meant that Lee could not replace his
   casualties, and the total war waged by Sherman, Sheridan and other
   Union armies devastated the infrastructure and caused widespread
   poverty and distress. The Confederacy suffered military losses of
   95,000 men killed in action and 165,000 who died of disease, for a
   total of 260,000,^[54] out of a total white Southern population at the
   time of around 5.5 million.^[55] Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of
   all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6% in the
   North and about 18% in the South.^[56] Northern military casualties
   exceeded Southern casualties in absolute numbers, but were two-thirds
   smaller in terms of proportion of the population affected.

Reconstruction and Jim Crow[edit]

   Main articles: Reconstruction era of the United States,
   Disfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era and Voting rights in the
   United States

   After the Civil War, the South was devastated in terms of population,
   infrastructure and economy. Because of states' reluctance to grant
   voting rights to freedmen, Congress instituted Reconstruction
   governments. It established military districts and governors to rule
   over the South until new governments could be established. Many white
   Southerners who had actively supported the Confederacy were temporarily
   disfranchised. Rebuilding was difficult as people grappled with the
   effects of a new labor economy of a free market in the midst of a
   widespread agricultural depression. In addition, what limited
   infrastructure the South had was mostly destroyed by the war. At the
   same time, the North was rapidly industrializing. To avoid the social
   effects of the war, most of the Southern states initially passed black
   codes. Eventually, these were mostly legally nullified by federal law
   and anti-Confederate legislatures, which persisted for a short time
   during Reconstruction.^[57]
   A Home on the Mississippi, Currier and Ives, 1871

   There were thousands of people on the move, as African Americans tried
   to reunite families separated by slaves sales, and sometimes migrated
   for better opportunities in towns or other states. Other freedpeople
   moved from plantation areas to cities or towns for a chance to get
   different jobs and out from under white control. At the same time,
   whites returned from refuges to reclaim plantations or town dwellings.
   In some areas, many whites returned to the land to farm for a while.
   Some freedpeople left the South altogether for states such as Ohio and
   Indiana, and later, Kansas. Thousands of others joined the migration to
   new opportunities in the Mississippi and Arkansas Delta bottomlands and
   Texas.

   With passage of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution of the United
   States (which outlawed slavery), the 14th Amendment (which granted full
   U.S. citizenship to African Americans) and the 15th amendment (which
   extended the right to vote to African American males), African
   Americans in the South were made free citizens and were given the right
   to vote. Under Federal protection, white and black Republicans formed
   constitutional conventions and state governments. Among their
   accomplishments was creating the first public education systems in
   Southern states, and providing for welfare through orphanages,
   hospitals and similar institutions.

   Northerners came south to participate in politics and business. Some
   were representatives of the Freedmen's Bureau and other agencies of
   Reconstruction; some were humanitarians with the intent to help black
   people. Some were adventurers who hoped to benefit themselves by
   questionable methods. They were all condemned with the pejorative term
   of carpetbagger. Some Southerners also took advantage of the disrupted
   environment and made money off various schemes, including bonds and
   financing for railroads.^[58]

   Secret vigilante organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan—an organization
   sworn to perpetuate white supremacy—had arisen quickly after the war's
   end and used lynching, physical attacks, house burnings and other forms
   of intimidation to keep African Americans from exercising their
   political rights. Although the first Klan was disrupted by prosecution
   by the Federal government in the early 1870s, other groups persisted.
   By the mid-to-late-1870s, elite white Southerners created increasing
   resistance to the altered social structure. Paramilitary organizations
   such as the White League in Louisiana (1874), the Red Shirts in
   Mississippi (1875) and rifle clubs, all "White Line" organizations,
   used organized violence against Republicans, blacks and whites, to turn
   Republicans out of office, repress and bar black voting, and restore
   Democrats to power.^[59] In 1876 white Democrats regained power in most
   of the state legislatures. They began to pass laws designed to strip
   African Americans and poor whites from the voter registration rolls.
   The success of late-19th century interracial coalitions in several
   states inspired a reaction among some white Democrats, who worked
   harder to prevent both groups from voting.^[60]

   Despite discrimination, many blacks became property owners in areas
   that were still developing. For instance, 90% of the Mississippi's
   bottomlands were still frontier and undeveloped after the war. By the
   end of the century, two-thirds of the farmers in Mississippi's Delta
   bottomlands were black. They had cleared the land themselves and often
   made money in early years by selling off timber. Tens of thousands of
   migrants went to the Delta, both to work as laborers to clear timber
   for lumber companies, and many to develop their own farms.^[61]
   Child laborers, Bluffton, South Carolina, 1913

   Nearly all Southerners, black and white, suffered as a result of the
   Civil War. Within a few years cotton production and harvest was back to
   pre-war levels, but low prices through much of the 19th century
   hampered recovery. They encouraged immigration by Chinese and Italian
   laborers into the Mississippi Delta. While the first Chinese entered as
   indentured laborers from Cuba, the majority came in the early-20th
   century. Neither group stayed long at rural farm labor.^[62] The
   Chinese became merchants and established stores in small towns
   throughout the Delta, establishing a place between white and
   black.^[63]

   Migrations continued in the late 19th and early 20th centuries among
   both blacks and whites. In the last two decades of the 19th century
   about 141,000 blacks left the South, and more after 1900, totaling a
   loss of 537,000. After that the movement increased in what became known
   as the Great Migration from 1910–1940, and the Second Great Migration
   through 1970. Even more whites left the South, some going to California
   for opportunities and others heading to Northern industrial cities
   after 1900. Between 1880 and 1910, the loss of whites totaled
   1,243,000.^[64] Five million more left between 1940 and 1970.

   From 1890 to 1908, 10 of the 11 states passed disfranchising
   constitutions or amendments that introduced voter registration
   barriers—such as poll taxes, residency requirements and literacy
   tests—that were hard for many poor to meet. Most African Americans,
   Mexican Americans, and tens of thousands of poor whites were
   disfranchised, losing the vote for decades. In some states, grandfather
   clauses temporarily exempted white illiterates from literacy tests. The
   numbers of voters dropped drastically throughout the South as a result.
   This can be seen on the feature "Turnout in Presidential and Midterm
   Elections" at the University of Texas Politics: Barriers to Voting.
   Alabama, which had established universal white suffrage in 1819 when it
   became a state, also substantially reduced voting by poor
   whites.^[65]^[66] Legislatures passed Jim Crow laws to segregate public
   facilities and services, including transportation.

   While African Americans, poor whites and civil rights groups started
   litigation against such provisions in the early-20th century, for
   decades Supreme Court decisions overturning such provisions were
   rapidly followed by new state laws with new devices to restrict voting.
   Most blacks in the South could not vote until 1965, after passage of
   the Voting Rights Act and Federal enforcement to ensure people could
   register. Not until the late 1960s did all American citizens regain
   protected civil rights by passage of legislation following the
   leadership of the American Civil Rights Movement.

Late 19th and 20th century—industrialization and Great Migration[edit]

   Main article: Great Migration (African American)

   At the end of the 19th century, white Democrats in the South had
   created state constitutions that were hostile to industry and business
   development. Banking was limited, as was access to credit. States
   persisted in agricultural economies.^[citation needed] As in Alabama,
   rural minorities held control in many state legislatures long after
   population had shifted to industrializing cities, and the legislators
   resisted business and modernizing interests. For instance, Alabama
   refused to redistrict from 1901 to 1972, long after major population
   and economic shifts to cities. For decades Birmingham generated the
   majority of revenue for the state, for instance, but received little
   back in services or infrastructure.^[67]
   An illustrated depiction of black people picking cotton, 1913

   In the late 19th century, Texas rapidly expanded its railroad network,
   creating a network of cities connected on a radial plan and linked to
   the port of Galveston. It was the first state^[citation needed]in which
   urban and economic development proceeded independently of rivers, the
   primary transportation network of the past. A reflection of increasing
   industry were strikes and labor unrest: "in 1885 Texas ranked ninth
   among forty states in number of workers involved in strikes (4,000);
   for the six-year period it ranked fifteenth. Seventy-five of the 100
   strikes, chiefly interstate strikes of telegraphers and railway
   workers, occurred in the year 1886."^[68]

   In 1890 Dallas was the largest city in Texas. By 1900 it had a
   population of more than 42,000, which more than doubled to over 92,000
   a decade later. Dallas was the harnessmaking capital of the world and
   center of other manufacturing. As an example of its ambitions, in 1907
   Dallas built the Praetorian Building, 15 stories tall and the first
   skyscraper west of the Mississippi. Others soon followed.^[69] Texas
   was transformed by a railroad network linking five important cities,
   among them Houston with its nearby port at Galveston, Dallas, Fort
   Worth, San Antonio, and El Paso. Each exceeded 50,000 in population by
   1920, with the major cities having three times that population.^[70]

   Business interests were ignored by the Bourbon class. Nonetheless,
   major new industries started developing in cities such as Atlanta, GA;
   Birmingham, AL; and Dallas, Fort Worth and Houston, Texas. Growth began
   occurring at a geometric rate. Birmingham became a major steel producer
   and mining town, with major population growth in the early decades of
   the 20th century.

   The first major oil well in the South was drilled at Spindletop near
   Beaumont, Texas, on the morning of January 10, 1901. Other oil fields
   were later discovered nearby in Arkansas, Oklahoma, and under the Gulf
   of Mexico. The resulting "Oil Boom" permanently transformed the economy
   of the West/South Central states and led to the most significant
   economic expansion after the Civil War.

   In the early 20th century, invasion of the boll weevil devastated
   cotton crops in states of the South. This was an additional catalyst to
   African Americans' decisions to leave the South. From 1910 to 1940, and
   then from the 1940s to 1970, more than 6.5 million African Americans
   left the South in the Great Migration to northern and midwestern
   cities, making multiple acts of resistance against persistent lynching
   and violence, segregation, poor education, and inability to vote. Their
   movements transformed many cities, creating new cultures and music in
   the North. Many African Americans, like other groups, became industrial
   workers; others started their own businesses within the communities.
   Southern whites also migrated to industrial cities, especially Chicago
   and Detroit, where they took jobs in the booming new auto industry.
   Photo of sharecropper family in Walker County, Alabama, ca. 1937

   Later, the Southern economy was dealt additional blows by the Great
   Depression and the Dust Bowl. After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, the
   economy suffered significant reversals and millions were left
   unemployed. Beginning in 1934 and lasting until 1939, an ecological
   disaster of severe wind and drought caused an exodus from Texas and
   Arkansas, the Oklahoma Panhandle region and the surrounding plains, in
   which over 500,000 Americans were homeless, hungry and jobless.^[71]
   Thousands left the region forever to seek economic opportunities along
   the West Coast.

   President Franklin D. Roosevelt noted the South as the "number one
   priority" in terms of need of assistance during the Great Depression.
   His administration created programs such as the Tennessee Valley
   Authority in 1933 to provide rural electrification and stimulate
   development. Locked into low productivity agriculture, the region's
   growth was slowed by limited industrial development, low levels of
   entrepreneurship, and the lack of capital investment.

   World War II marked a time of change in the South as new industries and
   military bases were developed by the Federal government, providing
   badly needed capital and infrastructure in many regions. People from
   all parts of the US came to the South for military training and work in
   the region's many bases and new industries. Farming shifted from cotton
   and tobacco to include soybeans, corn, and other foods.

   This growth increased in the 1960s and greatly accelerated into the
   1980s and 1990s. Large urban areas with over 4 million people rose in
   Texas, Georgia, and Florida. Rapid expansion in industries such as
   autos, telecommunications, textiles, technology, banking, and aviation
   gave some states in the South an industrial strength to rival large
   states elsewhere in the country. By the 2000 census, the South (along
   with the West) was leading the nation in population growth. However,
   with this growth has come long commute times and air pollution problems
   in cities such as Dallas, Houston, Atlanta, Austin, Charlotte, and
   others that rely on sprawling development and highway networks.

Presidential history[edit]

   The South produced nine of the first 12 U.S. Presidents prior to the
   Civil War. For more than a century after the Civil War, no Southerner
   became President unless he either moved North (like Woodrow Wilson) or
   was vice president when the president died in office (like
   Vice-Presidents Andrew Johnson, Harry Truman and Lyndon B. Johnson). In
   1976, Jimmy Carter defied this trend and became the first Southerner to
   break the pattern since Zachary Taylor in 1848. The South produced five
   of the last nine American Presidents: Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–69),
   Jimmy Carter (1977–81), George H. W. Bush (1989–93), Bill Clinton
   (1993–2001) and George W. Bush (2001–2009). Carter was from Georgia,
   Clinton from Arkansas, while George H.W. and George W. Bush were from
   Texas, although born in New England.

Growth and poverty[edit]

   In the antebellum years, by 1840 New Orleans was the wealthiest city in
   the country and the third largest in population, based on the growth of
   international trade associated with products being shipped to and from
   the interior of the country down the Mississippi River. It had the
   largest slave market in the country, as traders brought slaves to New
   Orleans by ship and overland to sell to planters across the Deep South.
   The city was a cosmopolitan port with a variety of jobs that attracted
   more immigrants than did other areas of the South.^[72] Because of lack
   of investment, construction of railroads to span the region lagged
   behind that in the North. People relied most heavily on river traffic
   for getting their crops to market and for transportation.

   In Mississippi before the war, for instance, most plantations were
   developed along the Mississippi and other navigable rivers. The
   bottomlands were not developed until after the war, when the chance to
   buy land attracted tens of thousands of migrants, both black and white.
   By the end of the century, two-thirds of farm owners in the Delta
   bottomlands were black. The long agricultural depression meant that
   many had to take on too much debt—together with disfranchisement and
   lack of access to credit, by 1910 many had lost their property and by
   1920, most blacks in the Delta were sharecroppers or landless workers.
   More than two generations of free African Americans had lost their
   stake in property.^[73]

Economy[edit]

   In the late 20th century, the South changed dramatically. It saw a boom
   in its service economy, manufacturing base, high technology industries,
   and the financial sector. Texas in particular witnessed dramatic growth
   and population change with the dominance of the energy industry.
   Tourism in Florida and along the Gulf Coast grew steadily throughout
   the last decades of the 20th century.

   Numerous new automobile production plants have opened in the region, or
   are soon to open, such as Mercedes-Benz in Tuscaloosa, Alabama; Hyundai
   in Montgomery, Alabama; the BMW production plant in Spartanburg, South
   Carolina; Toyota plants in Georgetown, Kentucky, Blue Springs,
   Mississippi and San Antonio; the GM manufacturing plant in Spring Hill,
   Tennessee; a Honda factory in Lincoln, Alabama; the Nissan North
   American headquarters in Franklin, Tennessee and factory in Canton,
   Mississippi; a Kia factory in West Point, Georgia; and the Volkswagen
   Chattanooga Assembly Plant in Tennessee.

   The two largest research parks in the country are located in the South:
   Research Triangle Park in North Carolina (the world's largest) and the
   Cummings Research Park in Huntsville, Alabama (the world's fourth
   largest).

   In medicine, the Texas Medical Center in Houston has achieved
   international recognition in education, research, and patient care,
   especially in the fields of heart disease, cancer, and rehabilitation.
   In 1994 the Texas Medical Center was the largest medical center in the
   world including fourteen hospitals, two medical schools, four colleges
   of nursing, and six university systems.^[74] The University of Texas
   M.D. Anderson Cancer Center is consistently ranked the #1 cancer
   research and treatment center in the United States.^[75]

   Many major banking corporations have headquarters in the region. Bank
   of America is in Charlotte, North Carolina. Wachovia was headquartered
   there before its purchase by Wells Fargo. Regions Financial Corporation
   is in Birmingham, as is AmSouth Bancorporation, and BBVA Compass.
   SunTrust Banks is located in Atlanta as is the district headquarters of
   the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. BB&T is headquartered in
   Winston-Salem.

   Many corporations are headquartered in Atlanta and its surrounding
   area, such as The Coca-Cola Company, Delta Air Lines, and The Home
   Depot, and also to many cable television networks, such as the Turner
   Broadcasting System (CNN, TBS, TNT, Turner South, Cartoon Network), and
   The Weather Channel. In recent years some southern states, notably
   Texas, have lured companies with lower tax burdens and lower cost of
   living for their workforce. Today, the states with the most Fortune 500
   companies include California, New York, and Texas; closely mirroring
   the economic and population resources of those states.^[76]

   This economic expansion has enabled parts of the South to report some
   of the lowest unemployment rates in the United States.^[77] But in the
   U.S. top ten of poorest big cities, the South is represented in the
   rankings by two cities: Miami, Florida and Memphis, Tennessee.^[78] In
   2011, nine out of ten poorest states were in the South.^[79]

Education[edit]

   Southern public schools in the past ranked in the lower half of some
   national surveys.^[80] When allowance for race is considered, a 2007 US
   Government list of test scores often shows white fourth and eighth
   graders performing better than average for reading and math; while
   black fourth and eighth graders also performed better than
   average.^[81] This comparison does not hold across the board.
   Mississippi scores lower than average no matter how the statistics are
   compared. However, newer data suggests that education in the south is
   on par with the nation, with 72% of high schoolers graduating compared
   to 73% nationwide.^[82]

Culture[edit]

   Main article: Culture of the Southern United States
   Street musicians in Maynardville, Tennessee, photographed in 1935
   The area roughly considered to constitute the Bible Belt

   The predominant culture of the South has its origins with the
   settlement of the region by large groups of Northern English, Scots
   lowlanders and Ulster-Scots (later called the Scotch-Irish) who settled
   in Appalachia and the Piedmont in the 18th century, and from parts of
   southern England such as East Anglia, Kent and the West Country in the
   17th century,^[83] and the many African slaves who were part of the
   Southern economy. African-American descendants of the slaves brought
   into the South compose the United States' second-largest racial
   minority, accounting for 12.1 percent of the total population according
   to the 2000 census. Despite Jim Crow era outflow to the North, the
   majority of the black population remains concentrated in the Southern
   states, and has heavily contributed to the cultural blend
   (Christianity, foods, art, music (see spiritual, blues, jazz and rock
   and roll)) that characterize Southern culture today.

   The South has been seen largely as a stronghold of Protestant
   Christianity. Although the traditional Southerner was Anglican, or more
   accurately Episcopalian, the predominant denominations in the South are
   now Baptists^[84] (especially the Southern Baptist Convention),
   followed by Methodists, with other denominations found throughout the
   region. Roman Catholics historically were concentrated in Maryland,
   Louisiana, and Hispanic areas such as South Texas and South Florida and
   along the Gulf Coast. The great majority of black Southerners are
   Baptist or Methodist.^[85] Statistics show that Southern states have
   the highest religious attendance figures of any region in the United
   States.^[citation needed]

Health[edit]

   Nine Southern states have obesity rates over 30% of the population, the
   highest in the country: Mississippi, Louisiana, West Virginia, Alabama,
   Oklahoma, Arkansas, South Carolina, Kentucky, and Texas.^[86]^[87]
   Rates for hypertension and diabetes for these states are also the
   highest in the nation.^[87] A study reported that six Southern states
   have the worse incidence of sleep disturbances in the nation,
   attributing the disturbances to high rates of obesity and smoking.^[88]
   Life expectancy is lower and death rates higher in the South than in
   the other regions of the country for all racial groups ^[89]^[90] This
   disparity reflects substantial divergence between the South and other
   regions since the middle of the 20th Century.^[91]

   The South also has the highest teen pregnancy rate in the country, with
   Arkansas, Mississippi, and Texas having rates exceeding 60 per 1,000
   teens.^[92] The South has the highest infant mortality rate in the
   US,^[93] the most traffic deaths,^[94] and the most gun deaths,^[95] as
   well as a higher percentage of obese people^[96] and diabetics.^[97] It
   has the largest number of people dying from stroke.^[98] The South has
   the highest rates of cognitive decline.^[99]

Politics[edit]

   Main article: Politics of the Southern United States
   A rally against school integration in 1959.

   In the first decades after Reconstruction, when white Democrats
   regained power in the state legislatures, they began to make voter
   registration more complicated, to reduce black voting. With a
   combination of intimidation, fraud and violence by paramilitary groups,
   they turned Republicans out of office and suppressed black voting. From
   1890 to 1908, ten of eleven states ratified new constitutions or
   amendments that effectively disenfranchised most black voters and many
   poor white voters. This disfranchisement persisted for six decades into
   the 20th century, depriving blacks and poor whites of all political
   representation. Because they could not vote, they could not sit on
   juries. They had no one to represent their interests, resulting in
   state legislatures consistently underfunding programs and services,
   such as schools, for blacks and poor whites.^[100]

   With the collapse of the Republican Party in nearly all parts of the
   South, the Democrats after 1900 moved to a system of primaries to
   select their candidates. Victory in a primary was tantamount to
   election. Apart from a few states (such as the Byrd Machine in
   Virginia, the Crump Machine in Memphis), and a few other local
   organizations, the Democratic Party itself was very lightly organized.
   It managed primaries but party officials had little other role. To be
   successful a politician built his own network of friends, neighbors and
   allies. Reelection was the norm, and the result from 1910 to the late
   19th century was that Southern Democrats in Congress had accumulated
   seniority, and automatically took the chairmanships of all
   committees.^[101]

   By the 1940s the Supreme Court began to find disfranchisement such as
   the "grandfather clause" and the white primary to be unconstitutional.
   Southern legislatures quickly passed other measures to keep blacks
   disfranchised, even after suffrage was extended more widely to poor
   whites. Because white Democrats controlled all the Southern seats in
   Congress they had outsize power in Congress and could sidetrack or
   filibuster efforts by Northerners to pass legislation against lynching,
   for example. The region became known as the Solid South. The
   Republicans controlled parts of the Appalachian Mountains and competed
   for power in the Border States. From the late 1870s to the 1960s, only
   rarely was a state or national Southern politician a Republican, apart
   from a few Appalachian mountain districts.^[102]^[103]

   Increasing support for civil rights legislation by the national
   Democratic Party beginning in 1948 caused segregationist Southern
   Democrats to nominate J. Strom Thurmond on a third-party "Dixiecrat"
   ticket in 1948. These Dixicrats returned to the party by 1950, but
   Southern Democrats held off Republican inroads in the suburbs by
   arguing that only they could defend the region from the onslaught of
   northern liberals and the civil rights movement. In response to the
   Brown v. Board of Education ruling of 1954, 101 Southern congressmen
   (19 senators, 82 House members of which 99 were Southern Democrats and
   2 were Republicans) in 1956 denounced the Brown decisions as a "clear
   abuse of judicial power [that] climaxes a trend in the federal
   judiciary undertaking to legislate in derogation of the authority of
   Congress and to encroach upon the reserved rights of the states and the
   people." The manifesto lauded, "...those states which have declared the
   intention to resist enforced integration by any lawful means." It was
   signed by all Southern senators except Majority Leader Lyndon B.
   Johnson, and Tennessee senators Albert Gore, Sr. and Estes Kefauver.
   Virginia closed schools in Warren County, Prince Edward County,
   Charlottesville, and Norfolk rather than integrate, but no other state
   followed suit. Democratic governors Orval Faubus of Arkansas, Ross
   Barnett of Mississippi, Lester Maddox of Georgia, and, especially,
   George Wallace of Alabama resisted integration and appealed to a rural
   and blue-collar electorate.^[104]
   President Johnson signs the historic Civil Rights Act of 1964.

   The northern Democrats' support of civil rights issues culminated when
   Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson signed into law the Civil Rights
   Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which ended legal
   segregation and provided federal enforcement of voting rights for
   blacks. In the presidential election of 1964, Barry Goldwater's only
   electoral victories outside his home state of Arizona were in the
   states of the Deep South where few blacks could vote before the 1965
   Voting Rights Act.^[105]

   Pockets of resistance to integration in public places broke out in
   violence during the 1960s by the shadowy Ku Klux Klan, which caused a
   backlash among moderates.^[106] Major resistance to school busing
   extending into the 1970s.^[107]

   National Republicans such as Richard Nixon began to develop their
   Southern strategy to attract conservative white Southerners, especially
   the middle class and suburban voters, in addition to traditional GOP
   pockets (such as Appalachia) and migrants from the North. The
   transition to a Republican stronghold in the South took decades. First,
   the states started voting Republican in presidential elections, except
   for native sons Jimmy Carter in 1976 and Bill Clinton in 1992 and 1996.
   Then the states began electing Republican senators and finally
   governors. Georgia was the last state to do so, with Sonny Perdue
   taking the governorship in 2002.^[108] In addition to its middle class
   and business base, Republicans cultivated the religious right and
   attracted strong majorities from the evangelical or Fundamentalist
   vote, mostly Southern Baptists, which had not been a distinct political
   force prior to 1980.^[109]

   After the 2012 elections, the 11 states of the former Confederacy were
   represented by 98 Republicans, 24 white Democrats and 16 black
   Democrats.^[110]

Other politicians and political movements[edit]

   Bill Clinton, newly elected Governor of Arkansas speaks with Jimmy
   Carter in 1978. Both presidents are Southern Democrats.

   The South has produced various nationally-known politicians and
   political movements. In 1948, a group of Democratic congressmen, led by
   Governor Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, split from the Democrats in
   reaction to an anti-segregation speech given by Minneapolis mayor and
   future senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota. They founded the States
   Rights Democratic or Dixiecrat Party. During that year's Presidential
   election, the party ran Thurmond as its candidate, but he finally lost
   the election.

   In the 1968 Presidential election, Alabama Governor George C. Wallace
   ran for President on the American Independent Party ticket. Wallace ran
   a "law and order" campaign similar to that of Republican candidate,
   Richard Nixon. Nixon's Southern Strategy of gaining electoral votes
   downplayed race issues and focused on culturally conservative values,
   such as family issues, patriotism, and cultural issues that appealed to
   Southern Baptists.

   In 1994 mid-term elections, another Southern politician, Newt Gingrich,
   led the Republican Revolution, ushered in 12 years of GOP control of
   the House. Gingrich became Speaker of the United States House of
   Representatives in 1995 and served until his resignation in 1999. Tom
   DeLay was the most powerful Republican leader in Congress^[citation
   needed] until he was indicted under criminal charges in 2005 and was
   forced to step aside by Republican rules.^[citation needed] Apart from
   Bob Dole of Kansas (1985–96), the recent Republican Senate leaders have
   been Southerners: Howard Baker (1981–85) of Tennessee, Trent Lott
   (1996–2003) of Mississippi, Bill Frist (2003–2006) of Tennessee, and
   Mitch McConnell (2007–present) of Kentucky.

   The Republicans candidates for President have won the South in
   elections since 1972, except for 1976. However, the region is not
   entirely monolithic, and every successful Democratic candidate since
   1976 has claimed at least three Southern states. Barack Obama won
   Florida, Maryland, Delaware, North Carolina, and Virginia in 2008 but
   did not repeat his victory in North Carolina during his 2012 reelection
   campaign.^[111]

Race relations[edit]

   Main article: Racism in the United States

Native Americans[edit]

   Native Americans had lived in the south for nearly 12,000 years. They
   were defeated by settlers in a series of wars ending in the War of 1812
   and the Seminole Wars, and most were removed west to Indian Territory
   (now Oklahoma and Kansas). However large numbers of Native Americans
   managed to stay behind by blending into the surrounding society. This
   was especially true of the wives of Euro-American merchants and miners.
   Racial segregation was commonplace in the South until the 1960s

Civil rights[edit]

   The South witnessed two major events in the lives of 20th century
   African Americans: the Great Migration and the American Civil Rights
   Movement.

   The Great Migration began during World War I, hitting its high point
   during World War II. During this migration, blacks left the South to
   find work in Northern factories and other sectors of the economy.^[112]

   The migration also empowered the growing Civil Rights Movement. While
   the movement existed in all parts of the United States, its focus was
   against disfranchisement and the Jim Crow laws in the South. Most of
   the major events in the movement occurred in the South, including the
   Montgomery Bus Boycott, the Mississippi Freedom Summer, the March on
   Selma, Alabama, and the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.. In
   addition, some of the most important writings to come out of the
   movement were written in the South, such as King's "Letter from
   Birmingham Jail". Most of the civil rights landmarks can be found
   around the South. The Martin Luther King, Jr., National Historic Site
   in Atlanta includes a museum that chronicles the American Civil Rights
   Movement as well as Martin Luther King, Jr.'s boyhood home on Auburn
   Avenue. Additionally, Ebenezer Baptist Church is located in the Sweet
   Auburn district as is the King Center, location of Martin Luther and
   Coretta Scott King's gravesites.

   The Civil Rights Movement ended Jim Crow laws across the South. A
   second migration appears to be underway, with African Americans from
   the North moving to the South in record numbers.^[113] While race
   relations are still a contentious issue in the South, the region
   surpasses the rest of the country in many areas of integration and
   racial equality. According to 2003 report by researchers at the
   University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, Virginia Beach, Charlotte,
   Nashville-Davidson, and Jacksonville were the four most integrated of
   the nation's fifty largest cities, with Memphis at number six.^[114]
   Southern states tend to have a low disparity in incarceration rates
   between blacks and whites relative to the rest of the country.^[115]

Symbolism[edit]

   While this "Confederate Flag" pattern is the one most often thought of
   as the "Confederate Flag" today, it was actually just one of many used
   by the Confederate armed forces. Variations of this design served as
   the Battle Flag of the Armies of Northern Virginia and Tennessee, and
   as the Confederate Naval Jack.

   Some Southerners use the Confederate flag to identify themselves with
   the South, states' rights and Southern tradition. Groups, such as the
   League of the South, have a high regard for the secession movement of
   1860, citing a desire to protect and defend Southern heritage.^[116]
   Numerous political battles have erupted over flying the Confederate
   flag over state capitols, and the naming of public buildings or
   highways after Confederate leaders, the prominence of certain statues,
   and the everyday display of Confederate insignia.^[117]

   Other symbols of the South include the Bonnie Blue Flag, magnolia
   trees, and the song "Dixie".^[118]

Major metropolitan areas[edit]

   The South was heavily rural as late as the 1940s, but now the
   population is increasingly concentrated in metropolitan areas,
   including central cities and their suburbs.
   Dallas Skyline
   Downtown Houston
   Washington, D.C. in the spring
   Miami
   Atlanta at night
   Downtown Tampa from above
   Rank Metropolitan Statistical Area State(s) Population(2013 est.)
   ^[119]
   1 Dallas–Fort Worth–Arlington TX 6,810,913
   2 Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown TX 6,313,158
   3 Washington–Arlington–Alexandria DC–VA–
   MD–WV 5,949,859
   4 Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach FL 5,828,191
   5 Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta GA 5,522,942
   6 Tampa–St. Petersburg–Clearwater FL 2,870,569
   7 Baltimore–Towson MD 2,770,738
   8 Charlotte–Gastonia–Concord NC–SC 2,335,358
   9 San Antonio-New Braunfels TX 2,277,550
   10 Orlando–Kissimmee–Sanford FL 2,267,846
   11 Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky* OH-IN-KY 2,137,406^[120]
   12 Austin–Round Rock-San Marcos TX 1,883,051
   13 Nashville-Davidson–Murfreesboro–Franklin TN 1,757,912
   14 Virginia Beach–Norfolk–Newport News VA–NC 1,707,369
   15 Jacksonville FL 1,394,624
   16 Memphis-Forrest City TN–MS–AR 1,341,746
   17 Oklahoma City OK 1,319,677
   18 Louisville–Jefferson County* KY–IN 1,262,261^[121]
   19 Richmond VA 1,245,764
   20 New Orleans–Metairie–Kenner LA 1,240,977
   21 Raleigh-Cary NC 1,214,516
   22 Birmingham–Hoover AL 1,140,300
   23 Tulsa OK 961,561
   24 Knoxville TN 852,715
   25 Greenville-Anderson-Mauldin SC 850,965

   * Asterisk indicates part of the metropolitan area is outside the
   states classified as Southern.

Major combined statistical areas[edit]

   Rank Combined Statistical Area State(s) Population(2013 est.)
   1 Washington-Baltimore-Arlington DC-MD-VA-WV-PA 9,443,180
   2 Dallas-Fort Worth TX 7,206,144
   3 Houston TX 6,508,323
   4 Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Port St. Lucie FL 6,447,610
   5 Atlanta-Athens-Clarke County-Sandy Springs GA 6,162,195
   6 Orlando-Deltona-Daytona Beach FL 2,975,658
   7 Charlotte-Concord NC-SC 2,493,040
   8 Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill NC 2,037,430
   9 Nashville-Davidson–Murfreesboro TN 1,876,933
   10 Virginia Beach-Norfolk VA 1,810,266
   11 Greensboro–Winston-Salem–High Point NC 1,619,313
   12 Jacksonville-St. Marys-Palatka FL–GA 1,518,677
   13 Louisville/Jefferson County–Elizabethtown–Madison KY-IN 1,490,724
   14 New Orleans-Metairie-Hammond LA-MS 1,467,880
   15 Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson SC 1,438,550
   16 Oklahoma City-Shawnee OK 1,390,835
   17 Memphis-Forrest City TN–MS-AR 1,369,006
   18 Birmingham-Hoover-Talladega AL 1,313,105
   19 Knoxville-Morristown-Sevierville TN 1,096,961
   20 El Paso-Las Cruces TX-NM 1,044,496

See also[edit]

   Portal icon United States portal
     * Bible Belt
     * Black Belt (U.S. region)
     * Confederate States of America
     * Cuisine of the Southern United States
     * Culture of honor (Southern United States)
     * Deep South
     * Dixie
     * List of plantations in the United States
     * New South
     * Old South
     * Southern American English
     * Southern art
     * Southern hospitality
     * Southern literature
     * Territories of the United States on stamps

Notes[edit]

    1. ^ ^a ^b "Regions and Divisions—2007 Economic Census". U.S. Census
       Bureau. Retrieved July 23, 2013.
    2. ^ Bethune, Lawrence E. "Scots to Colonial North Carolina Before
       1775". Lawrence E. Bethune's M.U.S.I.C.s Project.
    3. ^ Bethune, Lawrence E. "Scots to Colonial North Carolina before
       1775". Lawrence E. Bethune's M.U.S.I.C.s Project.
    4. ^ "Gallup Poll: U.S. race relations by region; The South". November
       19, 2002.
    5. ^ ^a ^b Cooper, Christopher A.; Knotts, H. Gibbs (2010). "Declining
       Dixie: Regional Identification in the Modern American South".
       Social Forces 88 (3): 1083–1101. doi:10.1353/sof.0.0284.
    6. ^ ^a ^b Rice, Tom W.; McLean, William P.; Larsen, Amy J. (2002).
       "Southern Distinctiveness over Time: 1972–2000". American Review of
       Politics 23: 193–220.
    7. ^ Cooper, Christopher A.; Knotts, H. Gibbs (2004). "Defining Dixie:
       A State-Level Measure of the Modern Political South". American
       Review of Politics 25: 25–39.
    8. ^ Reed, John Shelton (1982). One South: An Ethnic Approach to
       Regional Culture. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
       p. 3. ISBN 0807110035.
    9. ^ ^a ^b ^c Ancestry of the Population by State: 1980 – Table 3
   10. ^ ^a ^b Table 3a. Persons Who Reported a Single Ancestry Group for
       Regions, Divisions and States: 1980
   11. ^ ^a ^b Table 1. Type of Ancestry Response for Regions, Divisions
       and States: 1980
   12. ^ Wilson, Charles Reagan. Ferris, William R. Encyclopedia of
       Southern culture, page 556
   13. ^ Marc Egnal, Divergent paths: how culture and institutions have
       shaped North American growth (1996) p 170
   14. ^ Rebecca Mark and Robert C. Vaughan, The South (2004) p. 147
   15. ^ Cooper and Knotts, "Declining Dixie: Regional Identification in
       the Modern American South", p. 1084
   16. ^ Christopher A. Cooper and H. Gibbs Knotts, eds. The New Politics
       of North Carolina (2008)
   17. ^ Edward L. Ayers, What Caused the Civil War? Reflections on the
       South and Southern History (2005) p. 46
   18. ^ Michael Hirsh (April 25, 2008). "How the South Won (This) Civil
       War", Newsweek, accessed 2008-11-22
   19. ^ Howard W. Odum, Southern regions of the United States (1936)
   20. ^ Rebecca Mark, and Rob Vaughan, The South: The Greenwood
       Encyclopedia of American Regional Cultures (2004)
   21. ^ http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-01.pdf
   22. ^ "CSG Regional Offices". Council of State Governments. 2012.
       Retrieved February 13, 2014.
   23. ^ Mary Johnston, Pioneers of the Old South, A Chronicle of English
       Colonial Beginnings (1918)
   24. ^ James Oakes, Slavery and Freedom : An Interpretation of the Old
       South (1998)
   25. ^ C. Vann Woodward, The Origins of the New South, 1877–1913 (1951)
   26. ^ George Brown Tindall, The Disruption Of The Solid South (1972)
   27. ^ Rudy Abramson and Jean Haskell, eds. (2006)
   28. ^ Southeastern Division of the Association of American Geographers
   29. ^ Neal R. Peirce, The Deep South States of America;: People,
       politics, and power in the seven Deep South States (1974)
   30. ^ "United States: The Upper South." Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
   31. ^ Archived November 4, 2001 at the Wayback Machine
   32. ^ "GOP eyes potential for picking up U.S. House seats in
       Mid-South", Memphis Commercial Appeal
   33. ^ GAO Report: "resource allocations to medical centers in the Mid
       South"
   34. ^ The Mid-South: a regional profile of social, economic and health
       characteristics
   35. ^ The Tchula period in the mid-South and lower Mississippi Valley
   36. ^ see Conclusion: The Civil War in West Virginia
   37. ^ http://www.thefreedictionary.com/South
   38. ^ Britton, Kerry O.; Orr, David; Sun, Jianghua (2002). "Kudzu". In
       Van Driesche, R. Biological Control of Invasive Plants in the
       Eastern United States. USDA Forest Service. FHTET-2002-04.
       Retrieved 2008-05-03.
   39. ^ ^a ^b ^c Prentice, Guy. "Native american archeology and culture
       history". Retrieved 2008-02-11.
   40. ^ Cook, Noble David. Born To Die, pp. 1–11.
   41. ^ "Indentured Servitude in Colonial America"
   42. ^ Isaac, Rhys (1982). The Transformation of Virginia 1740–1790.
       University of North Carolina Press. pp. 22–23. ISBN 0-8078-4814-X.
   43. ^ David Hackett Fischer, Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in
       America, New York: Oxford University Press, 1989, pp.361–368
   44. ^ The World Book: Organized Knowledge in Story and Picture, Volume
       6 edited by Michael Vincent O'Shea, Ellsworth Decatur Foster,
       George Herbert Locke page 4989
   45. ^ Wilson, David. The Southern Strategy. University of South
       Carolina Press. 2005.
   46. ^ Selby, John E; Higginbotham, Don (2007)
   47. ^ Wilson, David K (2005). The Southern Strategy: Britain's conquest
       of South Carolina and Georgia, 1775–1780. Columbia, SC: University
       of South Carolina Press. p. 9
   48. ^ Henry Lumpkin, From Savannah to Yorktown: The American Revolution
       in the South (2000)
   49. ^ Peter Kolchin, American Slavery: 1619–1877, (Hill and Wang,
       1994), p. 73
   50. ^ Kolchin, American Slavery: 1619–1877, p. 81
   51. ^ "The Peculiar Institution of American Slavery". Retrieved
       2008-06-11.
   52. ^ Walter Johnson, Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave
       Market, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999, pp.5 and 215
   53. ^ http://www.tulane.edu/~latner/Aftermath/AApr15Comm.html
   54. ^ "Nineteenth Century Death Tolls: American Civil War". Retrieved
       2006-08-22.
   55. ^ American Civil War, Those Confederate States at the Wayback
       Machine (archived September 28, 2006)
   56. ^ "Toward a social history of the American Civil War: exploratory
       essays". Maris Vinovskis (1990). Cambridge University Press. p.7.
   57. ^ "Chapter 3: AN EASY ADJUSTMENT TO THE POST WAR NATION: PENSACOLA
       BETWEEN 1865 AND 1870". fsu.edu. December 4, 2010.
   58. ^ Richard Nelson Current, Those Terrible Carpetbaggers: A
       Reinterpretation (1989)
   59. ^ Nicholas Lemann, Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War,
       New York: Farrar Straus & Giroux, 2002, pp.70–75
   60. ^ Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon",
       Constitutional Commentary, Vol.17, 2000,, p. 27, accessed
       2008-03-10
   61. ^ John Solomon Otto, The Final Frontiers, 1880–1930: Settling the
       Southern Bottomlands, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1999
   62. ^ "Italians in Mississippi", Mississippi History Now, accessed
       2007-11-28
   63. ^ Vivian Wong, "Somewhere Between White and Black: The Chinese in
       Mississippi", Organization of American Historians Magazine of
       History at the Wayback Machine (archived October 24, 2005),
       accessed 2007-11-15
   64. ^ Edward L. Ayers, The Promise of the New South: Life after
       Reconstruction, New York: Oxford University Press, 1992; 15th
       Anniversary Edition (pbk), 2007, p.24
   65. ^ Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon",
       Constitutional Commentary, Vol.17, 2000,, pp.12–13, accessed
       2008-03-10
   66. ^ Glenn Feldman, The Disfranchisement Myth: Poor Whites and
       Suffrage Restriction in Alabama, Athens: University of Georgia
       Press, 2004
   67. ^ Dr. Michael McDonald, US Elections Project: Alabama Redistricting
       Summary, George Mason University at the Wayback Machine (archived
       April 6, 2005), accessed 2008-04-06
   68. ^ "Strikes", Texas Handbook On-Line, accessed 2008-04-06
   69. ^ Jackie McElhaney and Michael V. Hazel, "Dallas", Handbook of
       Texas Online, accessed 2008-04-06
   70. ^ David G. McComb, "Urbanization", Handbook of Texas Online,
       accessed 2008-04-06
   71. ^ "First Measured Century: Interview: James Gregory". Retrieved
       2006-08-22.
   72. ^ Walter Johnson, Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave ,
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999, pp. 2–7
   73. ^ John C. Willis, Forgotten Time: The Yazoo-Mississippi Delta after
       the Civil War, Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2000.
   74. ^ Texas State Historical Association
       http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/kct23
   75. ^ U.S. News & World Report Rankings
       http://health.usnews.com/best-hospitals/rankings/cancer
   76. ^
       http://www.ceo.com/entrepreneurial_ceo/two-charts-showing-states-wi
       th-the-most-fortune-500-companies/
   77. ^ "State jobless rate below US average". The Decatur Daily. August
       19, 2005. Retrieved 2007-02-12.
   78. ^ Milwaukee now fourth poorest city in nation JSOnline, September
       28, 2010
   79. ^ America's Poorest States, 24/7 Wall St
   80. ^ Matus, Ron, (March 6, 2005). "Schools still rank near the
       bottom". St. Petersburg Times. Retrieved 2007-09-05.
   81. ^ US Department of Education retrieved 2008-06-14
   82. ^ "Graduation Rates Rise in South, Study Finds". Education Week.
       October 14, 2009. Retrieved 2013-01-12.
   83. ^ David Hackett Fischer, Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in
       America, New York: Oxford University Press, 1989, pp.633–639
   84. ^ Baptists as a Percentage of all Residents, 2000 Department of
       Geography and Meteorology, Valparaiso University
   85. ^ Samuel S. Hill, Charles H. Lippy, and Charles Reagan Wilson, eds.
       Encyclopedia of Religion in the South (2005)
   86. ^ "Adult Obesity Facts". Overweight and Obesity. Centers for
       Disease Control and Prevention. August 13, 2012.  Missing or empty
       |url= (help)
   87. ^ ^a ^b Baird, Joel Banner (June 30, 2010). "Study: Vermont among
       least obese states". The Burlington Free Press (Burlington, VT).
       pp. 1A, 4A. Retrieved May 12, 2013.
   88. ^ The Six Worst States for Sleep - 24/7 Wall St
   89. ^ "Geographic and Racial Variation in Premature Mortality in the
       U.S.: Analyzing the Disparities".
   90. ^ CDC. "Death in the United States".
   91. ^ Fenelon, A. (2013). "Geographic Divergence in Mortality in the
       United States". Population and Development Review 39 (4): 611–634.
       doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2013.00630.x.  edit
   92. ^ "State Disparities in Teenage Birth Rates in the United States".
       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. October 2010.
   93. ^ Matthews, TJ, M.S., et al. "Infant Mortality Statistics from the
       2008 Period Linked Birth/Infant Death Data Set. Division of Vital
       Statistics. National Vital Statistics Report, Vol 60, No. 5, May
       10, 2012.
   94. ^ Stuart Silverstein, "Traffic Deaths: A Surprising Dimension of
       the Red State-Blue State Divide", NBCNews.com, November 20, 2012
   95. ^ Mario Tama, "Deadliest Gun States", The Daily Beast.
   96. ^ Rachel Pomerance, "Most and Least Obese U.S. States", U.S. News &
       World Report, August 16, 2012.
   97. ^ "Diabetes Most Prevalent In Southern United States, Study Finds",
       Science Daily, Sep. 25, 2009
   98. ^ "Southern Diet Might Explain the 'Stroke Belt'", HealthDay,
       February 7, 2013
   99. ^ Rick Nauert, "U.S. South Has Higher Risk of Cognitive Decline",
       Psych Central, May 27, 2011
   100. ^ Michael Perman, Pursuit of Unity: A Political History of the
       American South (2009)
   101. ^ The classic study is V.O. Key, Southern politics in State and
       Nation (1949)
   102. ^ Key. Southern Politics State and Nation (1984)
   103. ^ Gordon B. McKinney (2010). Southern Mountain Republicans
       1865-1900. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN
       978-0-8078-9724-9
   104. ^ Numan V. Bartley, The New South, 1945–1980 (1995) pp 455–70
   105. ^ Bernard Cosman, Five States for Goldwater Continuity and Change
       in Southern Presidential voting Patterns (1966)
   106. ^ David M. Chalmers, Backfire: how the Ku Klux Klan helped the
       civil rights movement (2003)
   107. ^ Bartley, The New South pp 408–11
   108. ^ Earl Black and Merle Black, The Rise of Southern Republicans
       (2003)
   109. ^ William C. Martin, With God On Our Side: The Rise of the
       Religious Right in America (2005)
   110. ^ Michael Barone, "Republicans Find Refuge in the House," Wall
       Street Journal (Nov. 9, 2012) p. A13.
   111. ^ "Romney Bus Tour Charts Course for Battlegrounds Obama Won".
       Businessweek. August 10, 2012.
   112. ^ Katzman, 1996
   113. ^ "Tracking New Trends in Race Migration". News & Notes. National
       Public Radio. March 14, 2006. Retrieved 2008-04-04.
   114. ^ "Study shows Memphis among most integrated cities". Memphis
       Business Journal. January 13, 2003.
   115. ^ Mauer, Marc; Ryan S. King (July 2007). "Uneven Justice: State
       Rates of Incarceration By Race and Ethnicity" (PDF). Washington,
       D.C.: The Sentencing Project. p. 16. Retrieved 2010-04-20.
       (Report.)
   116. ^ "League of the South Core Beliefs Statement". League of the
       South. June 1994. Retrieved 2008-06-12.
   117. ^ Tony Horowitz, Confederates in the Attic (1998)
   118. ^ James Michael Martinez et al., eds. (2000). Confederate Symbols.
       University Press of Florida.
   119. ^ "Table 1. Annual Estimates of the Population of Metropolitan and
       Micropolitan Statistical Areas: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2012
       (CBSA-EST2012-01)". March 2013 United States Census. United States
       Census Bureau, Population Division. Retrieved 2014-02-19.
   120. ^ The 2012 Census population estimate for the part within the
       South (Kentucky) is 431,997.
   121. ^ The 2010 Census population for the part within the South
       (Kentucky) is 973,271.

References[edit]

     * Ayers, Edward L. What Caused the Civil War? Reflections on the
       South and Southern History (2005)
     * Cash, Wilbur J. The Mind of the South (1941),
     * Cooper, Christopher A. and H. Gibbs Knotts, eds. The New Politics
       of North Carolina (U. of North Carolina Press, 2008) ISBN
       978-0-8078-5876-9
     * Flynt, J. Wayne Dixie's Forgotten People: The South's Poor Whites
       (1979). deals with 20th century.
     * David M. Katzman. "Black Migration". The Reader's Companion to
       American History. Houghton Mifflin Company.
     * James Grossman (1996). "Chicago and the 'Great Migration'".
       Illinois History Teacher 3 (2).
     * McWhiney, Grady. In Cracker Culture: Celtic Ways in the Old South
       (1988)
     * John O. Allen and Clayton E. Jewett (2004). Slavery in the South: A
       State-by-State History. Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-32019-5.
     * Rayford Logan (1997). The Betrayal of the Negro from Rutherford B.
       Hayes to Woodrow Wilson. New York: Da Capo Press.
       ISBN 0-306-80758-0.
     * William B. Hesseltine (1936). A History of the South, 1607–1936.
       Prentice-Hall.
     * Mark, Rebecca, and Rob Vaughan. The South: The Greenwood
       Encyclopedia of American Regional Cultures (2004)
     * Robert W. Twyman. and David C. Roller, ed., ed. (1979).
       Encyclopedia of Southern History. LSU Press. ISBN 0-8071-0575-9.
     * Charles Reagan Wilson and William Ferris, ed., ed. (1989).
       Encyclopedia of Southern Culture. University of North Carolina
       Press. ISBN 0-8078-1823-2.

Further reading[edit]

     * Edward L. Ayers (1993). The Promise of the New South: Life after
       Reconstruction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-508548-5.
     * Monroe Lee Billington (1975). The Political South in the 20th
       Century. Scribner. ISBN 0-684-13983-9.
     * Earl Black and Merle Black (2002). The Rise of Southern
       Republicans. Belknap press. ISBN 0-674-01248-8.
     * W. J. Cash (1935). The Mind of the South. New York: Vintage Books.
       ISBN 0-679-73647-6.
     * Pete Daniel (2000). Lost Revolutions: The South in the 1950s.
       University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-4848-4.
     * Davis, Donald, and Mark R. Stoll. Southern United States: An
       Environmental History (2006)
     * Edwards, Laura F. "Southern History as U.S. History," Journal of
       Southern History, 75 (Aug. 2009), 533–64.
     * Frederickson, Kari. (2013). Cold War Dixie: Militarization and
       Modernization in the American South. Athens, GA: University of
       Georgia Press.
     * Michael Kreyling (1998). Inventing Southern Literature. University
       Press of Mississippi. p. 66. ISBN 1-57806-045-1.
     * Heather A. Haveman (2004). "Antebellum literary culture and the
       evolution of American magazines". Poetics 32: 5–28.
       doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2003.12.002.
     * Eugene D. Genovese (1976). Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves
       Made. New York: Vintage Books. p. 41. ISBN 0-394-71652-3.
     * Morris, Christopher (2009). "A More Southern Environmental
       History". Journal of Southern History 75 (3): 581–598.
     * Howard N. Rabinowitz (September 1976). "From Exclusion to
       Segregation: Southern Race Relations, 1865–1890". Journal of
       American History 43: 325–50.
     * Nicol C. Rae (1994). Southern Democrats. Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 0-19-508709-7.
     * Jeffrey A. Raffel (1998). Historical Dictionary of School
       Segregation and Desegregation: The American Experience. Greenwood
       Press. ISBN 0-313-29502-6.
     * Virts, Nancy (2006). "Change in the Plantation System: American
       South, 1910–1945". Explorations in Economic History 43 (1):
       153–176. doi:10.1016/j.eeh.2005.04.003.
     * Wells, Jonathan Daniel (2009). "The Southern Middle Class". Journal
       of Southern History 75 (3): 651–.
     * C. Vann Woodward (1955). The Strange Career of Jim Crow. Oxford
       University Press. ISBN 0-19-514690-5.
     * Gavin Wright (1996). Old South, New South: Revolutions in the
       Southern Economy Since the Civil War. LSU Press.
       ISBN 0-8071-2098-7.

External links[edit]

     * DocSouth: Documenting the American South – multimedia collections
       from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
     * Center for the Study of Southern Culture – the research center at
       the University of Mississippi, with a graduate program and
       undergraduate major in southern studies



   Articles Related to the Southern United States


                 * v
     * t
     * e

   Regions of the United States
   Administrative
   (political)

                   Units
                              * U.S. state
                              * District of Columbia
                              * Insular area
                              * Minor Outlying Island
                              * Maritime territory

                 Time zones
                              * Hawaii–Aleutian
                              * Alaska
                              * Pacific
                              * Mountain
                              * Central
                              * Eastern

                   Census
                              * West
                                   + Pacific
                                   + Mountain
                              * Midwest
                                   + E N Central
                                   + W N Central
                              * Northeast
                                   + New England
                                   + Middle Atlantic
                              * South
                                   + S Atlantic
                                   + E S Central
                                   + W S Central

                 Courts of
                 appeals
                              * 1st
                              * 2nd
                              * 3rd
                              * 4th
                              * 5th
                              * 6th
                              * 7th
                              * 8th
                              * 9th
                              * 10th
                              * 11th

      Physical

                 Physiographic
                                 * Pacific Mountain
                                 * Intermontane Plateaus
                                 * Rocky Mountain
                                 * Superior Upland
                                 * Interior Plains
                                 * Interior Highlands
                                 * Appalachian
                                 * Atlantic Plain

                    Coastal
                                 * Arctic
                                 * West
                                 * Great Lakes
                                 * Gulf
                                 * East

     Historical

                 Cessions and
                 accessions
                               * 13 Colonies
                               * Louisiana Purchase
                               * Gadsden Purchase
                               * Texas Annexation
                               * Oregon Treaty
                               * Mexican Cession
                               * Alaska Purchase
                               * Newlands Resolution

                  Civil War
                               * Union
                                    + Border states
                               * Confederacy
                                    + Old South
                                    + Dixie
                                    + Slave states

                             Theaters
                                    Pacific
                                    Western
                                    Trans-Mississippi
                                    Lower Seaboard
                                    Eastern

      Divided
                   * Pacific Northwest
                   * Atlantic Northeast
                   * Prairie Pothole
                   * Columbia
                   * Oregon

       Other
                   * Appalachia
                   * Central
                   * Four Corners
                   * Great Plains
                   * High Plains
                   * Intermountain
                   * Interior
                   * Northwest Territory
                   * South Central
                   * Southern
                        + Deep
                        + New
                        + Upland
                   * Southeast
                   * Southwest

     * List
     * Category


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


        * v
     * t
     * e

   National personifications

   Argentina
          Effigies of Argentina

   Armenia
          Mother Armenia

   Australia
          Little Boy from Manly

   Bangladesh
          Mother Bengal

   Belgium
          Leo Belgicus

   Brazil
          Efígie da República

   Cambodia
          Preah Thong and Neang Neak

   Canada
          Johnny Canuck

   Czech Republic
          Čechie
          Czech Vašek
          Švejk

   Denmark
          Holger Danske

   Finland
          Finnish Maiden

   France
          Marianne

   Georgia
          Kartlis Deda

   Germany
          Deutscher Michel
          Germania

   Greece
          Athena
          "Greece" of Delacroix

   Iceland
          Lady of the Mountain

   India
          Bharat Mata

   Indonesia/Malaysia
          Ibu Pertiwi

   Ireland
          Ériu
          Hibernia
          Kathleen Ni Houlihan

   Israel
          Srulik

   Italy
          Italia turrita

   Japan
          Amaterasu

   Kenya
          Wanjiku

   Malta
          Melita

   Netherlands
          Netherlands Maiden

   New Zealand
          Zealandia

   Norway
          Ola Nordmann

   Philippines
          Juan dela Cruz
          Maria Clara

   Poland
          Polonia

   Portugal
          Efígie da República
          Zé Povinho

   Russia
          Mother Russia

   Spain
          Hispania

   Sweden
          Mother Svea

   Switzerland
          Helvetia

   Ukraine
          Cossack Mamay

   United Kingdom
          Britannia
          John Bull
          Dame Wales

   United States
          Brother Jonathan
          Columbia
          Lady Liberty
          Uncle Sam
          Billy Yank

                Northern states

          Johnny Reb

                Southern states

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_United_States&oldid
   =624461940"
   Categories:
     * Census regions of the United States
     * Southern United States

   Hidden categories:
     * Pages using web citations with no URL
     * Use mdy dates from May 2012
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2011
     * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011
     * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Čeština
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * Galego
     * 한국어
     * Hrvatski
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * Latina
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Sardu
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Slovenščina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 6 September 2014 at 21:14.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
