   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Sovereign immunity in the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009)

   Sovereign immunity in the United States is the legal privilege by which
   the American federal, state, and tribal governments cannot be sued
   (sovereign immunity). Local governments in most jurisdictions enjoy
   immunity from some forms of suit, particularly in tort. Foreign
   governments enjoy immunity from suit (state immunity) as provided in
   the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act.

                             Seal of the United States Supreme Court.svg

                              United States Federal
                            Civil Procedure Doctrines

                                                            Justiciability
                                                         Advisory opinions
                                            Standing · Ripeness · Mootness
                                                       Political questions
                                                              Jurisdiction
                                               Subject-matter jurisdiction
                                           * Federal question jurisdiction

                                                  * Diversity jurisdiction

                                                     Amount in controversy
                                               * Supplemental jurisdiction

                                                    * Removal jurisdiction

                                       * Class Action Fairness Act of 2005

                                                     Personal jurisdiction
                                                               In personam
                                                       In rem jurisdiction
                                                 Quasi in rem jurisdiction
                                                                Federalism
                                                Erie doctrine · Abstention
                                           Sovereign immunity · Abrogation
                                                   Rooker-Feldman doctrine
                                                              Adequate and
                                                  independent state ground
                                                        edit this template

Contents

     * 1 Federal sovereign immunity
     * 2 State sovereign immunity in federal courts
          + 2.1 Early history and Eleventh Amendment
          + 2.2 Later interpretation
     * 3 Tribal sovereign immunity
     * 4 Foreign sovereign immunity in state and federal courts
     * 5 Local governmental immunity
     * 6 Exceptions and abrogation
          + 6.1 Discrimination
          + 6.2 Arbitration
          + 6.3 Suits brought by the United States
          + 6.4 Suits brought by another state
          + 6.5 Suits filed against state officials under the "stripping
            doctrine"
          + 6.6 Suits as to which Congress has abrogated the states'
            Eleventh Amendment immunity
          + 6.7 Certain contracts with the government
          + 6.8 Actions taken in bad faith
     * 7 References
     * 8 See also

Federal sovereign immunity[edit]

   In the United States, the federal government has sovereign immunity and
   may not be sued unless it has waived its immunity or consented to
   suit.^[1] The United States as a sovereign is immune from suit unless
   it unequivocally consents to being sued.^[2] The United States Supreme
   Court in Price v. United States observed: "It is an axiom of our
   jurisprudence. The government is not liable to suit unless it consents
   thereto, and its liability in suit cannot be extended beyond the plain
   language of the statute authorizing it."^[3]

   The principle was not mentioned in the original United States
   Constitution. The courts have recognized it both as a principle that
   was inherited from English common law, and as a practical, logical
   inference (that the government cannot be compelled by the courts
   because it is the power of the government that creates the courts in
   the first place).^[4]

   The United States has waived sovereign immunity to a limited extent,
   mainly through the Federal Tort Claims Act, which waives the immunity
   if a tortious act of a federal employee causes damage, and the Tucker
   Act, which waives the immunity over claims arising out of contracts to
   which the federal government is a party. The Federal Tort Claims Act
   and the Tucker Act are not as broad waivers of sovereign immunity as
   they might appear, as there are a number of statutory exceptions and
   judicially fashioned limiting doctrines applicable to both.^[which?]
   Title 28 U.S.C. § 1331 confers federal question jurisdiction on
   district courts, but this statute has been held not to be a blanket
   waiver of sovereign immunity on the part of the federal government.

   In Federal tax refund cases filed by taxpayers against the United
   States, various courts have indicated that Federal sovereign immunity
   is waived under subsection (a)(1) of 28 U.S.C. § 1346 in conjunction
   with Internal Revenue Code section 7422 (26 U.S.C. § 7422), or under
   section 7422 in conjunction with subsection (a) of Internal Revenue
   Code section 6532 (26 U.S.C. § 6532).^[5]

   Congress has also waived sovereign immunity for patent infringement
   claims under 28 USC § 1498(a), but that statute balances this waiver
   with provisions that limit the remedies available to the patent holder.
   The government may not be enjoined from infringing a patent, and
   persons performing work for the government are immune both from
   liability and from injunction. Any recourse must be had only against
   the government in the United States Court of Federal Claims. In
   Advanced Software Design v. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the
   Federal Circuit expanded the interpretation of this protection to
   extend to private companies doing work not as contractors, but in which
   the government participates even indirectly.

State sovereign immunity in federal courts[edit]

Early history and Eleventh Amendment[edit]

   The 1793 Supreme Court case Chisholm v. Georgia confirmed that Article
   III, § 2 which granted diversity jurisdiction to the federal courts,
   allowed lawsuits "between a State and Citizens of another State" as the
   text reads. In 1795, the Eleventh Amendment was ratified in response to
   this ruling, removing federal judicial jurisdiction from lawsuits
   "prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another
   State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State". The validity
   of and retroactivity of the Eleventh Amendment was affirmed in the 1798
   case Hollingsworth v. Virginia.

Later interpretation[edit]

   In Hans v. Louisiana, the Supreme Court of the United States held that
   the Eleventh Amendment re-affirms that states possess sovereign
   immunity and are therefore immune from being sued in federal court
   without their consent. In later cases, the Supreme Court has
   strengthened state sovereign immunity considerably. In Blatchford v.
   Native Village of Noatak, the court explained that

     we have understood the Eleventh Amendment to stand not so much for
     what it says, but for the presupposition of our constitutional
     structure which it confirms: that the States entered the federal
     system with their sovereignty intact; that the judicial authority in
     Article III is limited by this sovereignty, and that a State will
     therefore not be subject to suit in federal court unless it has
     consented to suit, either expressly or in the "plan of the
     convention." States may consent to suit, and therefore waive their
     Eleventh Amendment immunity by removing a case from state court to
     federal court. See Lapides v. Board of Regents of University System
     of Georgia.

   (Citations omitted). In Alden v. Maine, the Court explained that while
   it has

     sometimes referred to the States’ immunity from suit as "Eleventh
     Amendment immunity[,]" [that] phrase is [a] convenient shorthand but
     something of a misnomer, [because] the sovereign immunity of the
     States neither derives from nor is limited by the terms of the
     Eleventh Amendment. Rather, as the Constitution's structure, and its
     history, and the authoritative interpretations by this Court make
     clear, the States’ immunity from suit is a fundamental aspect of the
     sovereignty which the States enjoyed before the ratification of the
     Constitution, and which they retain today (either literally or by
     virtue of their admission into the Union upon an equal footing with
     the other States) except as altered by the plan of the Convention or
     certain constitutional Amendments.

   Writing for the court in Alden, Justice Anthony Kennedy argued that in
   view of this, and given the limited nature of congressional power
   delegated by the original unamended Constitution, the court could not
   "conclude that the specific Article I powers delegated to Congress
   necessarily include, by virtue of the Necessary and Proper Clause or
   otherwise, the incidental authority to subject the States to private
   suits as a means of achieving objectives otherwise within the scope of
   the enumerated powers."

   However, a "consequence of [the] Court's recognition of
   pre-ratification sovereignty as the source of immunity from suit is
   that only States and arms of the State possess immunity from suits
   authorized by federal law." Northern Ins. Co. of N. Y. v. Chatham
   County (emphases added). Thus, cities and municipalities lack sovereign
   immunity, Jinks v. Richland County, and counties are not generally
   considered to have sovereign immunity, even when they "exercise a
   'slice of state power.'" Lake Country Estates, Inc. v. Tahoe Regional
   Planning Agency.

Tribal sovereign immunity[edit]

   Main article: Tribal sovereignty in the United States

   The federal government recognizes tribal nations as "domestic dependent
   nations" and has established a number of laws attempting to clarify the
   relationship between the federal, state, and tribal governments.
   Generally speaking, Native American tribes enjoy immunity from suit—in
   federal, state, or tribal courts—unless they consent to suit, or unless
   the federal government abrogates that immunity.^[6]

Foreign sovereign immunity in state and federal courts[edit]

   Main article: Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act

   The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) of 1976 establishes the
   limitations as to whether a foreign sovereign nation (or its political
   subdivisions, agencies, or instrumentalities) may be sued in U.S.
   courts—federal or state. It also establishes specific procedures for
   service of process and attachment of property for proceedings against a
   Foreign State. The FSIA provides the exclusive basis and means to bring
   a lawsuit against a foreign sovereign in the United States. In
   international law, the prohibition against suing a foreign government
   is known as state immunity.

Local governmental immunity[edit]

   Counties and municipalities are not entitled to sovereign immunity. In
   Lincoln County v. Luning, 133 U.S. 529 (1890), the Court held that the
   Eleventh Amendment does not bar an individual's suit in federal court
   against a county for nonpayment of a debt. (By contrast, a suit against
   a statewide agency is considered a suit against the state under the
   Eleventh Amendment. See, e.g., Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651 (1974);
   Ford Motor Co. v. Department of Treasury, 323 U.S. 459 (1945)). In
   allowing suits against counties and municipalities, the Court was
   unanimous, relying in part on its "general acquiescence" in such suits
   over the prior thirty years. William Fletcher, a professor of legal
   studies at Yale University, explains the different treatment on the
   ground that in the nineteenth century, a municipal corporation was
   viewed as more closely analogous to a private corporation than to a
   state government. Fletcher, note 2.

   County and municipal officials, when sued in their official capacity,
   can only be sued for prospective relief under Federal law.^[7] Under
   state law, however, the Court in Pennhurst noted that even without
   immunity, suits against municipal officials relate to an institution
   run and funded by the state, and any relief against county or municipal
   officials that has some significant effect on the state treasury must
   be considered a suit against the state, and barred under the doctrine
   of sovereign immunity.

Exceptions and abrogation[edit]

   There are exceptions to the doctrine of sovereign immunities derived
   from the 11th amendment:

Discrimination[edit]

   If the state or local government entities receive federal funding for
   whatever purpose, they cannot claim sovereign immunity if they are sued
   in federal court for discrimination. The United States Code, Title 42,
   Section 2000d-7 explicitly says this.

   The Supreme Court decision of Board of Trustees of the University of
   Alabama v. Garrett seems to nullify this; however, numerous appellate
   court cases, such as Doe v. Nebraska in the 8th Circuit^[8] and Thomas
   v. University of Houston of the 5th Circuit^[9] have held that, as long
   as the state entity receives federal funding, then the sovereign
   immunity for discrimination cases is not abrogated, but voluntarily
   waived. Since the receiving of the federal funds - such as FAFSA and
   affirmative action - was optional, then the waiver of sovereign
   immunity was optional. If a state entity wanted its sovereign immunity
   back, all they have to do in these circuits is stop receiving federal
   funding.

   However, the 2nd Circuit does not share this ideal.^[10] Currently,
   they are the only federal court of appeals to take this approach to the
   issue.^[11]

Arbitration[edit]

   In C & L Enterprises, Inc. v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of
   Oklahoma, 532 U.S. 411 (2001), the Supreme Court of the United States
   held that sovereigns are not immune under the Federal Arbitration Act.
   Since arbitration is a matter of contract between the parties, agreeing
   to participate in arbitration constitutes consent to be subject to the
   arbitrator's jurisdiction, thus constituting a voluntary waiver of
   immunity.^[12]

Suits brought by the United States[edit]

   Because the U.S. is a superior sovereign, it may need to bring suit
   against a state from time to time. According to the Supreme Court,
   proper jurisdiction for a contract suit by the United States Federal
   Government against a state is in Federal District Court.^[13]

Suits brought by another state[edit]

   Similar to the U.S. v. State exclusion above, a state may also sue
   another state in the federal court system. Again, there would be a
   conflict of interest if either state's court system tried the case.
   Instead, the federal court system provides a neutral forum for the
   case.

   Under Article III, Section 2 of the United States Constitution, the
   Supreme Court of the United States has original jurisdiction over cases
   between states. Congress, if it so chooses, may grant lower federal
   courts concurrent jurisdiction over cases between states. However,
   Congress has not yet chosen to do so. Thus, the United States Supreme
   Court currently has original and exclusive jurisdiction over cases
   between state governments.

Suits filed against state officials under the "stripping doctrine"[edit]

   Accuracy dispute
   This article appears to contradict the article Qualified immunity.
   Please see discussion on the linked talk page. Please do not remove
   this message until the contradictions are resolved. (June 2014)

   The "stripping doctrine" permits a state official who used his or her
   position to act illegally to be sued in his or her individual capacity.
   In other words, once public officials have acted illegally, they are
   theoretically stripped of their position's power and are eligible to be
   sued as individuals. However, the government itself is still immune
   from being sued through respondeat superior. The Court has openly
   called this "stripping doctrine" a legal fiction. Therefore, a citizen
   may sue an official under this "stripping doctrine" and get around any
   sovereign immunity that that official might have held within his or her
   position within a state.

   When a citizen uses this exception, they can't include the state in the
   suit: they have to list specifically the official's name. They also
   can't seek damages from the state, because they can't list the state as
   a party. However, the citizen can seek prospective, or future, relief
   by asking the court to direct the future behavior of the official.

   For example, Ex parte Young allows federal courts to enjoin the
   enforcement of unconstitutional state (or federal) statutes on the
   theory that "immunity does not extend to a person who acts for the
   state, but [who] acts unconstitutionally, because the state is
   powerless to authorize the person to act in violation of the
   Constitution." Althouse, Tapping the State Court Resource, 44 Vand. L.
   Rev. 953, 973 (1991). Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman
   (465 U.S.) ("the authority-stripping theory of Young is a fiction that
   has been narrowly construed"); Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho
   ("Young rests on a fictional distinction between the official and the
   State"). The Young doctrine was narrowed by the court in Edelman v.
   Jordan, which held that relief under Young can only be for prospective,
   rather than retrospective, relief; the court reasoned that the Eleventh
   Amendment's protection of state sovereignty requires the state's
   coffers to be shielded from suit. Prospective relief includes
   injunctions and other equitable orders, but would rarely include
   damages. This limitation of the Young doctrine "focused attention on
   the need to abrogate sovereign immunity, which led to the decision two
   years later in Fitzpatrick." Althouse, Vanguard States, supra, at 1791
   n.216

   For more details, "constitutional torts" 42 U.S.C. § 1983 allows state
   officials to be sued in their individual or official capacities, a
   principle which was demonstrated again in Brandon v. Holt, 469 U.S. 464
   (1984).

Suits as to which Congress has abrogated the states' Eleventh Amendment
immunity[edit]

   See also: Congressional power of enforcement

   The federal government and nearly every state have passed tort claims
   acts allowing them to be sued for the negligence, but not intentional
   wrongs^[citation needed], of government employees. The common-law tort
   doctrine of respondeat superior makes employers generally responsible
   for the torts of their employees. In the absence of this waiver of
   sovereign immunity, injured parties would generally have been left
   without an effective remedy. See Brandon v. Holt.

   Under the abrogation doctrine, while Congress cannot use its Article I
   powers to subject states to lawsuits in either federal courts, Seminole
   Tribe v. Florida, or a fortiori its own courts, Alden, supra, it can
   abrogate a state's sovereign immunity pursuant to the powers granted to
   it by §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, and thus subject them to
   lawsuits. Seminole, supra; Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer. However:
     * The court requires "a clear legislative statement" of intent to
       abrogate sovereignty, Blatchford, supra; Seminole, supra.
     * Because Congress' power under §5 is only "the power 'to enforce,'
       not the power to determine what constitutes a constitutional
       violation," for the abrogation to be valid, the statute must be
       remedial or protective of a right protected by the Fourteenth
       Amendment and "[t]here must be a congruence and proportionality
       between the injury to be prevented or remedied and the means
       adopted to that end," City of Boerne v. Flores. But "[t]he ultimate
       interpretation and determination of the Fourteenth Amendment's
       substantive meaning remains the province of the Judicial Branch."
       Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents. Simply put: "Under the City of
       Boerne doctrine, courts must ask whether a statutory remedy has
       'congruence and proportionality' to violations of Section 1 rights,
       as those rights are defined by courts." Althouse, Vanguard States,
       Laggard States: Federalism & Constitutional Rights, 152 U. Pa. L.
       Rev. 1745, 1780 (2004)
     * States can expressly waive sovereign immunity, but do not do so
       implicitly simply by participating in a commercial enterprise where
       Congress subjects market participants to lawsuits. College Savings
       Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board.

   To the surprise of many observers, however, the Court has found that
   somewhat different rules may apply to Congressional efforts to subject
   the states to suit in the domain of federal bankruptcy law. In Central
   Virginia Community College v. Katz, the Court held that state sovereign
   immunity was not implicated by the exercise of in rem jurisdiction by
   bankruptcy courts in voiding a preferential transfer to a state.
   Justice Stevens, writing for a majority of five (including Justice
   O'Connor, in one of her last cases before retirement, and Justices
   Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer), referred to the rationale of an earlier
   bankruptcy decision, but relied more broadly on the nature of the
   bankruptcy power vested in Congress under Article I. "The question", he
   stated, "[was] not whether Congress could 'abrogate' state sovereign
   immunity in the Bankruptcy Act (as Congress had attempted to do);
   rather, because the history and justification of the Bankruptcy Clause,
   as well as legislation enacted immediately following ratification,
   demonstrate that [the Bankruptcy Clause] was intended not just as a
   grant of legislative authority to Congress, but also to authorize
   limited subordination of state sovereign immunity in the bankruptcy
   arena." In reaching this conclusion, he acknowledged that the Court's
   decision in Seminole Tribe and succeeding cases had assumed that those
   holdings would apply to the Bankruptcy Clause, but stated that the
   Court was convinced by "[c]areful study and reflection" that "that
   assumption was erroneous". The Court then crystallized the current
   rule: when Congressional legislation regulates matters that implicate
   "a core aspect of the administration of bankrupt estates", sovereign
   immunity is no longer available to the States if the statute subjects
   them to private suits.

   It is worth noting that the Court in Central Virginia Community College
   v. Katz added this cryptic caveat to their holding: "We do not mean to
   suggest that every law labeled a 'bankruptcy' law could, consistent
   with the Bankruptcy Clause, properly impinge upon state sovereign
   immunity". It is quite possible the Court has anticipated a significant
   narrowing of the doctrine.

Certain contracts with the government[edit]

   By way of the Tucker Act, certain claims of monetary damages against
   the United States are exempt from sovereign immunity. These cases are
   heard by the United States Court of Federal Claims, or, for cases
   involving less than ten thousand dollars, a district court has
   concurrent jurisdiction.

   Examples of contracts where immunity is waived include:
     * Debts incurred.
     * Salaries of government employees.
     * Tax refunds that have not been sent.
     * Commercial contracts.
     * Any contract that has a provision in it specifically waiving
       sovereign immunity.

Actions taken in bad faith[edit]

   Further information: bad faith

   If a defendant can demonstrate that the government's action was done in
   bad faith, they can receive damages despite sovereign immunity.
   Typically if a defendant can demonstrate that the government
   intentionally acted wrongly with the sole purpose of causing damages,
   they can recover for injury or economic losses. For example, if access
   lanes to a major bridge are closed for repair and results in severe
   traffic congestion, the action was in good faith and the state couldn't
   be sued. However, if, as in the Fort Lee lane closure scandal, the
   lanes were closed in retaliation against a mayor who declined to
   support a politician's campaign, with the explicit purpose of causing
   traffic jams, such lawsuits could proceed.^[14]

References[edit]

    1. ^ See Gray v. Bell, 712 F.2d 490, 507 (D.C. Cir. 1983).
    2. ^ United States v. Mitchell, 445 U.S. 535, 538 (1980)
    3. ^ Price v. United States, 174 U.S. 373, 375-76 (1899)
    4. ^ Template:Title=Federal Sovereign Immunity
    5. ^ Roger D. Martin, "Waiver of Sovereign Immunity in Tax Refund
       Proceedings in Bankruptcy," Vol. 11, No. 1, NABTalk, p. 16, at 23,
       Nat'l Ass'n of Bankr. Trustees (Columbia, S.C. 1995).
    6. ^ C & L Enters., Inc. v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of
       Okla., 532 U.S. 411 (2001); Kiowa Tribe of Okla. v. Mfg. Techs.,
       Inc., 523 U.S. 751 (1998); Okla. Tax Comm'n v. Citizen Band,
       Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Okla., 498 U.S. 505 (1991); Santa Clara
       Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49 (1978); Puyallup Tribe, Inc. v.
       Dep't of Game of State of Wash., 433 U.S. 165 (1977); United States
       v. U.S. Fidelity & Guar. Co., 309 U.S. 506 (1940); Turner v. United
       States, 248 U.S. 354 (1919). See also Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y.
       v. Madison Cnty., 605 F.3d 149, 156 (2d Cir. 2010), cert. granted,
       131 S. Ct. 459, vacated and remanded, 131 S. Ct. 704 (2011) (per
       curiam).
    7. ^ Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89 (1984).
    8. ^ http://www.ca8.uscourts.gov/opndir/03/10/022014P.pdf
    9. ^ "Blewett William Thomas, Plaintiff-Appellee v. University of
       Houston". Retrieved August 26, 2010.
   10. ^ "GREGORY WARREN, Plaintiff-Appellant, -v- GLENN S. GOORD".
       Retrieved August 26, 2010.
   11. ^ "2d Cir.: Rehab Act claims barred by sovereign immunity".
       Retrieved August 26, 2010.
   12. ^ "C & L Enterprises, Inc. v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe
       of Oklahoma, 532 U.S. 411 (2001)". Retrieved Aug 20, 2011.
   13. ^ West Virginia v. United States, 479 U.S. 305; 107 S.Ct. 702; 93
       L.Ed.2d 639 (1987).
   14. ^ John Culhane (January 14, 2014). "How to Sue Over the Christie
       Bridge Scandal and Win". Slate.com. Retrieved January 25, 2014.

See also[edit]

     * Former Indian Reservations in Oklahoma

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sovereign_immunity_in_the_Un
   ited_States&oldid=622290714"
   Categories:
     * Sovereign immunity in the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles needing additional references from July 2009
     * All articles needing additional references
     * All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases
     * Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August
       2014
     * Articles contradicting other articles
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 22 August 2014 at 04:23.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
