   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Sports in the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Part of a series on the
       Culture of the United States
   Flag of the United States.svg
                 History
                  People
                Languages
   Mythology and folklore
     * Mythology
     * Folklore

                 Cuisine
                Festivals
                 Religion
   Art
     * Architecture
     * Sculpture
     * Fashion

   Literature
     * Comic books
     * Poetry

   Music and performing arts
     * Music

   Media
     * Radio
     * Television
     * Cinema

                  Sport
   Monuments
     * World Heritage Sites

   Symbols
     * Flag
     * Coat of arms

     * Portal icon United States portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Sports are an important part of the culture of the United States. The
   four major professional sports leagues in the United States are Major
   League Baseball (MLB), the National Basketball Association (NBA), the
   National Football League (NFL), and the National Hockey League (NHL);
   all enjoy massive media exposure and are considered the preeminent
   competitions in their respective sports in the world. Three of those
   leagues have teams that represent Canadian cities, and all four are
   among the most lucrative sports leagues in the world. The top
   professional soccer league in the United States, Major League Soccer,
   has not yet reached the popularity levels of the top four sports
   leagues or its international counterparts, although average attendance
   has been increasing.

   Professional teams in all major sports operate as franchises within a
   league. All major sports leagues use the same type of schedule with a
   playoff tournament after the regular season ends. In addition to the
   major league-level organizations, several sports also have professional
   minor leagues, active in smaller cities across the country.

   Sports are particularly associated with education in the United States,
   with most high schools and universities having organized sports.
   College sports competitions play an important role in the American
   sporting culture, and certain college sports — particularly college
   football and college basketball — are at least as popular as
   professional sports. The major sanctioning body for college sports is
   the NCAA.

Contents

     * 1 Olympics
     * 2 Individual sports
          + 2.1 Motor sports
               o 2.1.1 Indianapolis 500
               o 2.1.2 NASCAR
               o 2.1.3 Other motorsports
          + 2.2 Outdoor sports
          + 2.3 Tennis
          + 2.4 Track & Field
          + 2.5 Other popular individual sports
     * 3 Popular team sports
          + 3.1 Overview
          + 3.2 American football
          + 3.3 Baseball
          + 3.4 Basketball
          + 3.5 Ice hockey
          + 3.6 Soccer
     * 4 Other team sports
          + 4.1 Lacrosse
          + 4.2 Volleyball
          + 4.3 Rugby Union
          + 4.4 Cricket
          + 4.5 Ultimate and Disc Sports (Frisbee)
          + 4.6 Other sports
          + 4.7 Other team recreational activities
     * 5 Organization of American sports
          + 5.1 Amateur sports
          + 5.2 Professional sports
          + 5.3 Government regulation
     * 6 Sports media in the United States
     * 7 Most popular sports in the United States
          + 7.1 Baseball vs. Football
          + 7.2 Organized college and high school sports
     * 8 Sports Leagues in the United States
          + 8.1 The Five Major Sports Leagues
          + 8.2 Other Team Sports Leagues
          + 8.3 Other Individual Sports Leagues
     * 9 See also
     * 10 References

Olympics[edit]

   Main article: United States at the Olympics

   The United States has sent athletes to every celebration of the modern
   Olympic Games, except the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, USSR, which
   it boycotted due to the Soviet war in Afghanistan. The United States
   Olympic Committee (USOC) is the National Olympic Committee for the
   United States.

   American athletes have won a total of 2570 medals at the Summer Olympic
   Games and another 253 at the Winter Olympic Games^[citation needed].
   More medals have been won in athletics (track and field) (738, 29%) and
   swimming (489, 19%) than any others^[citation needed]. Thomas Burke was
   the first athlete to represent the United States at the Olympics. He
   took first place in both the 100 meters and the 400 meters of the 1896
   Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece^[citation needed]. American athlete
   Michael Phelps is the most decorated Olympic athlete of all time, with
   22 Olympic medals, 18 of them gold.
   Michael Phelps celebrates after winning his 8th gold medal.

   The United States has won more gold and overall medals than any other
   country in the Summer Games and overall. The US also has the
   second-most overall medals at the Winter games, trailing only Norway.
   Earlier United States mainly conceded to Soviet Union at summer Games
   and to Soviet Union, Norway, East Germany at winter Games only and now
   strongly fights with China only at summer Games. The United States is
   the only country to have won at least one gold medal at every Winter
   Olympics, and has won the total medal count at Lake Placid in the 1932
   Winter Olympics and at Vancouver in the 2010 Winter Olympics. During
   the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics, the United States set a record for
   most total medals of any country at a single Winter Olympics.

   The United States has hosted both Summer and Winter Games in 1932 and
   most occasions of the Games among other countries - eight times, four
   times each for the Summer and Winter Games:
     * 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis, 1932 Summer Olympics and 1984
       Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta
     * 1932 Winter Olympics and 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, 1960
       Winter Olympics in Squaw Valley, 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake
       City

Individual sports[edit]

Motor sports[edit]

   Jimmie Johnson has won Driver of the Year five times.
   Main article: Motorsport in the United States

   Motor sports are widely popular in the United States, but Americans
   generally ignore major international series, such as Formula One and
   MotoGP, in favor of home-grown racing series.

   Americans, like the rest of the world, initially began using public
   streets as a host of automobile races. As time progressed it was soon
   discovered that these venues were often unsafe to the public as they
   offered relatively little crowd control. Promoters and drivers in the
   United States discovered that horse racing tracks could provide better
   conditions for drivers and spectators than public streets. The result
   has been long standing popularity for oval track racing while road
   racing has waned; however, an extensive illegal street racing culture
   persists.^[1]

Indianapolis 500[edit]

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway is among the world's premier racing
   facilities.^[citation needed]

   Historically, open wheel racing was the most popular nationwide, with
   the Indianapolis 500 being the most widely followed race. However, an
   acrimonious split in 1994 between the primary series, CART (later known
   as Champ Car), and the Indianapolis Motor Speedway (the site of the
   Indy 500) led to the formation of the Indy Racing League, which
   launched the rival IndyCar Series in 1996. From that point, the
   popularity of open wheel racing in the U.S. declined dramatically.^[2]
   The feud was settled in 2008 with an agreement to merge the two series
   under the IndyCar banner, but enormous damage had already been done to
   the sport.^[3] Post-merger, Indycar continues to remain with slight
   gains per year, despite a product that has become compelling.

NASCAR[edit]

   The CART-IRL feud coincided with an enormous expansion of stock car
   racing, governed by NASCAR, from its past as a mostly regional circuit
   mainly followed in the Southern U.S. to a truly national sport.
   NASCAR's audience peaked in the mid 2000s, and has declined a bit but
   it continues to have around 2-4 million viewers per race. Current
   NASCAR drivers include Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, Tony Stewart, and
   Dale Earnhardt Jr. NASCAR's most popular race is the Daytona 500 held
   each year at Daytona Beach, Florida in February.

Other motorsports[edit]

   In addition to autoracing, several other motorsports enjoy varying
   degrees of popularity in the United States: dirt track racing, sprint
   car racing, monster truck competitions (including the internationally
   popular Monster Jam circuit), demolition derby, figure 8 racing and
   tractor pulling.

Outdoor sports[edit]

   Hunting and fishing are very popular in the U.S., especially in rural
   areas. Other popular outdoors activities in the country include hiking,
   mountain climbing, paintball and kayaking. In winter, many Americans
   head to mountainous areas for skiing and snowboarding. Cycling and road
   bicycle racing have increased in popularity, fueled by the success of
   cyclists Greg LeMond and Lance Armstrong (although Armstrong has now
   been stripped of most of his honors due to doping revelations).
   Billie Jean King founded the Women's Tennis Association and other
   organizations.

Tennis[edit]

   Tennis is a popular sport in the U.S.,^[citation needed] with the
   pinnacle of the sport in the country being the US Open played every
   fall in New York. Tennis is popular in all five categories (Men's and
   Ladies' Singles; Men's, Ladies' and Mixed Doubles);^[citation needed]
   however, the most popular are the singles. The United States has had a
   lot of success in tennis for many years, with players such as Billie
   Jean King (pictured), Chris Evert, Jimmy Connors, John McEnroe, and
   Pete Sampras dominating their sport in the past. More recently, the
   Williams sisters, Venus Williams and Serena Williams, have been a
   strong force in the women's game, and the twin brothers Bob and Mike
   Bryan have claimed nearly every possible record for men's doubles
   teams.

Track & Field[edit]

   Main articles: United States records in track and field and USA Track &
   Field

   There are many track and field events which involve individual athletes
   competing, including sprints, middle and long-distance events, and
   hurdling. Regular jumping events include long jump, triple jump, high
   jump and pole vault, while the most common throwing events are shot
   put, javelin, discus and hammer. There are also "combined events", such
   as heptathlon and decathlon, in which athletes compete in a number of
   the above events. The United States has frequently set world standards
   in various disciplines of track and field for both male and female
   athletes. Tyson Gay and Michael Johnson hold various sprint records for
   male athletes while Florence Griffith Joyner set various world sprint
   records for female athletes. Alan Webb's personal record on the mile is
   just three seconds short of the world record, while Mary Slaney set
   many world records for middle-distance disciplines.

   A particular turning point in US track occurred in the running boom of
   the 1970s. After a series of American successes in various disciplines
   of running from the likes of marathoners Frank Shorter and Bill Rodgers
   as well as track athletes Dave Wottle and Steve Prefontaine, running as
   an American past-time finally manifested. Carl Lewis is also credited
   with "normalizing" the practice of having a lengthy track career as
   opposed to retiring once reaching the age when it is less realistic of
   gaining a PB (personal best) result. The United States is home to
   school-sponsored track and field, a tradition in which most schools
   from middle school through college feature a track and field team. High
   school track and field in the United States provides excellent
   development for creating a big talent pool of athletes in the country.
   Due to the amount of American athletes who satisfy Olympic norm
   standards, the US holds national trials to select the best of its
   top-tier athletes for Olympic competition.

Other popular individual sports[edit]

     * Golf
     * Disc Golf
     * Boxing
     * Mixed martial arts – Developed in the 1990s, MMA has achieved
       popularity in the 21st century. Many companies promote MMA cards,
       with the U.S.-based UFC the most dominant.
     * Wrestling – Though not a popular sport on a national level, high
       school wrestling is one of the most popular participatory sports
       for young men in the U.S. Professional wrestling, in contrast,
       enjoys widespread popularity as a spectator sport (particularly
       during the 1990s) despite being widely known to be a scripted and
       choreographed product wholly unrelated to the amateur sport.
     * Racquetball
     * Rodeo – Bull riding, a subset of the rodeo, enjoys popularity as a
       standalone sport, especially the pro competition, Professional Bull
       Riders.

     * Skateboarding – Skateboarding culture was born in the U.S., which
       holds many of the top tournaments and produces the majority of
       professional skateboarders.
     * Surfing
     * Horse racing – The Breeders Cup and the Triple Crown are the two
       most prominent competitions; the latter has not been swept since
       1978, the longest drought in the contest's history.
     * Fencing
     * Swimming – Swimming is a major competitive sport at high school and
       college level, but receives little mainstream media attention
       outside of the Olympics.
     * Mountain biking
     * Bowling – Bowling is the most popular participation "game" sport in
       the U.S. with more than 43 million people going bowling at least
       once a year.^[4]
     * Figure skating
     * Snowboarding

Popular team sports[edit]

Overview[edit]

   The most popular team sports in the United States are American
   football, basketball, baseball/softball, soccer, and ice hockey. All
   five of these team sports are popular with fans, are widely watched on
   television, have a fully professional league, are played by millions of
   Americans, and enjoy varsity status at many Division 1 colleges.
   Sport Favorite
   Sport^[5] TV viewing
   record (mil)
   (since 2000)^1 Professional League Participants^[6] NCAA DI Teams
   (Men + Women)
   American football 38.8% 111.5m National Football League 8.9 million 249
   (249M + 0W)
   Basketball 15.3% 39.1m National Basketball Association 24.4 million 698
   (350M + 348W)
   Baseball/Softball 14.8% 35.9m Major League Baseball 23.3 million 589
   (298M + 291W)
   Soccer 8.2% 29.2m Major League Soccer 13.6 million 531 (204M + 327W)
   Ice Hockey 3.8% 8.5m National Hockey League 3.1 million 95 (59M + 36W)
    1. TV viewing record measures the game with the most TV viewers in the
       U.S. since 2000.^[7]^[8]^[9]^[10]^[11]

American football[edit]

   Main articles: American football in the United States, History of
   American football, National Football League and College football
   The NFL's New England Patriots vs. the Pittsburgh Steelers.

   American football, known within the U.S. simply as football, has the
   most participants of any sport at both high school^[12] and college
   levels.^[13]

   The NFL is the preeminent professional football league in the United
   States. The NFL has 32 franchises divided into two conferences. After a
   16-game regular season, each conference sends six teams to the NFL
   Playoffs, which eventually culminate in the league's championship game,
   the Super Bowl.

   Millions watch college football throughout the fall months, and some
   communities, particularly in rural areas, place great emphasis on their
   local high school football teams. The popularity of college and high
   school football in areas such as the Southern United States
   (Southeastern Conference) and the Great Plains (Big 12 Conference and
   Big Ten Conference) stems largely from the fact that these areas
   historically generally did not possess markets large enough for a
   professional team.^[14] Nonetheless, college football has a rich
   history in the United States, predating the NFL by decades, and fans
   and alumni are generally very passionate about their teams.
   Tom Brady against the Washington Redskins on August 28, 2009.

   During football season in the fall, fans have the opportunity to watch
   high school games on Fridays and Saturdays, college football on
   Saturdays, and NFL games on Sundays, the usual playing day of the
   professional teams. However, some colleges play games on Tuesday (the
   Mid-American Conference in particular plays a national game Tuesday
   nights) and Wednesday nights, while the NFL offers weekly games on
   Monday (since 1970) and Thursday (since 2006). Between September and
   Thanksgiving weekend, there is at least one nationally televised
   college or professional football game every day.^[citation needed]

   Super Bowl Sunday is the biggest annual sporting event held in the
   United States. The Super Bowl itself is always among the highest-rated
   programs off all-time in the Nielsen ratings.

   Notable NFL players include Joe Montana, Roger Staubach, Dick Butkus,
   Joe Greene, Bart Starr, Johnny Unitas, Walter Payton, Steve Young,
   Jerry Rice, Brett Favre, Emmitt Smith, and Ray Lewis. Notable current
   NFL players include Peyton Manning, Tom Brady, and Adrian Peterson.

   Indoor American football, a form of football played in indoor arenas,
   has several professional and semi-professional leagues. The Arena
   Football League, which plays by the formerly proprietary code of arena
   football, was active from 1987 to 2008 and folded in 2009, but several
   teams from the AFL and its former minor league, af2, relaunched the
   league in 2010. Most other extant indoor leagues date to the mid-2000s
   (decade) and are regional in nature.

   The Canadian Football League has a niche market in the United States;
   the league has not had any teams or played any games in the United
   States since the mid-1990s but has had at least some television
   coverage continuously since 2004. Roughly half of the CFL's players
   come from the United States, a number that is limited at that level by
   the league's domestic player quotas.

   Nationwide, the NFL obtains the highest television ratings for regular
   and post-season games among major sports. This situation began in the
   late 1960s and early 1970s with the establishment of the Super Bowl and
   merger of the existing professional leagues, the old NFL and the
   American Football League, into one NFL league. Since then, watching NFL
   games on television on Sunday afternoons has become a common routine
   for many Americans during the football season. Among the professional
   American football teams in the NFL which have become practically
   identified with their host cities are the Pittsburgh Steelers, the
   Dallas Cowboys, the New York Giants, the Green Bay Packers and the
   Washington Redskins. It could also be said^[clarification needed] that
   college football (i.e. NCAA) enjoys unparalleled popularity in the
   southeastern states, where there are fewer professional teams in the
   major sports leagues.^[citation needed] In many of these areas, college
   football is the most avidly followed sport, with the Saturday college
   games being the biggest event of the week.

Baseball[edit]

   Main articles: History of baseball in the United States and Major
   League Baseball
   Fenway Park in Boston is the oldest stadium in Major League Baseball.

   Baseball and a variant, softball, are popular participatory sports in
   the U.S. The highest level of baseball in the U.S. is Major League
   Baseball. The World Series of Major League Baseball is the culmination
   of the sport's postseason each October. It is played between the winner
   of each of the two leagues, the American League and the National
   League, and the winner is determined through a best-of-seven playoff.
   Alex Rodriguez batting in 2007

   Notable American baseball players in history include Babe Ruth, Ty
   Cobb, Cy Young, Ted Williams, Lou Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio, Mickey Mantle,
   Stan Musial, Willie Mays, Sandy Koufax, Yogi Berra, Hank Aaron, Nolan
   Ryan, Cal Ripken, Roger Clemens, and Jackie Robinson, who was
   instrumental in dissolving the color line and allowing
   African-Americans into the major leagues. The more noted players of
   today include Derek Jeter and Albert Pujols.

   Baseball is popular in certain East Asian countries—Japan, South Korea,
   and Taiwan—and Latin American countries or territories such as the
   Dominican Republic, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Venezuela. Among the
   Latin American stars of the past who became legends in the major
   leagues were Roberto Clemente and Fernando Valenzuela. The most
   successful major league player from Asia is Ichiro Suzuki.

   As baseball developed over 150 years ago in the northeast, it has been
   played and followed in this region longer than in others. The city of
   New York is for many sports fans synonymous with the New York Yankees
   and their logo. The team is noted as having been the team of many of
   the all-time greats in the history of the game, and for having won more
   titles than any other US major professional sports franchise. The city
   was also host to two other highly popular baseball teams in the
   National League, the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants, before
   their transfer to California beginning with the 1958 season. The
   Yankees' chief rivals, the Boston Red Sox, also enjoy a huge following
   in Boston and throughout New England. The fierce National League
   rivalry between the former Brooklyn Dodgers and New York Giants was
   transferred to the West Coast when the teams became the Los Angeles
   Dodgers and the San Francisco Giants, and California has always been
   among the US states which have supplied the most players in the major
   leagues. Chicago sports fans also avidly follow the Chicago Cubs and to
   a lesser extent the Chicago White Sox despite the comparative lack of
   success for the teams, with Chicago Cub fans being known throughout the
   country for their passionate loyalty to the team despite their not
   having won a championship since 1908.

Basketball[edit]

   Main articles: National Basketball Association and College basketball

   Of those Americans citing their favorite sport, basketball is ranked
   second (counting amateur levels) behind football.^[citation needed]
   However, in regards to professional sports the NBA is ranked third in
   popularity.^[15] More Americans play basketball than any other team
   sport, according to the National Sporting Goods Association, with over
   26 million Americans playing basketball. Basketball was invented in
   1891 by physical education teacher James Naismith in Springfield,
   Massachusetts.
   Chicago Bulls Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson 1997

   The National Basketball Association, more popularly known as the NBA,
   is the world's premier men's professional basketball league and one of
   the major professional sports leagues of North America. It contains 30
   teams (29 teams in the U.S. and 1 in Canada) that play an 82-game
   season from October to June. After the regular season, eight teams from
   each conference compete in the playoffs for the Larry O'Brien
   Championship Trophy. The American Basketball Association, active from
   1967 until 1976, when it merged with the NBA, was the last major
   competitor of the NBA.
   U.S. men's national basketball team at the 2008 Summer Olympics.

   Since the 1992 Summer Olympics, NBA players have represented the United
   States in international competition and won several important
   tournaments. The Dream Team was the unofficial nickname of the United
   States men's basketball team that won the gold medal at the 1992
   Olympics.

   Basketball at both the college and high school levels is popular
   throughout the country. Every March, a 68-team, six-round,
   single-elimination tournament (commonly called March Madness)
   determines the national champions of NCAA Division I men's college
   basketball.

   Most U.S. states also crown state champions among their high schools.
   Many high school basketball teams have intense local followings,
   especially in the Midwest and Upper South.^[citation needed] Indiana
   has 10 of the 12 largest high school gyms in the United States,^[16]
   and is famous for its basketball passion, known as Hoosier Hysteria.

   Notable NBA players in history include Wilt Chamberlain (4 time MVP),
   Bill Russell (5 time MVP), Bob Pettit (11 time all NBA team), Bob Cousy
   (12 time all NBA team), Walt Frazier, Jerry West, (12 time all NBA
   team), Julius Erving, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (6 time MVP), Magic Johnson
   (3 time MVP), Larry Bird (3 time MVP), Michael Jordan (6 time finals
   MVP), John Stockton (#1 in career assists and steals), Karl Malone (14
   time all NBA team), Shaquille O'Neal (3 time finals MVP) and Jason Kidd
   (#2 in career assists and steals). Notable players in the NBA today
   include Kobe Bryant, LeBron James, Tim Duncan, Kevin Durant, Paul
   George, Dwyane Wade, James Harden, Dwight Howard, Demarcus Cousins,
   Blake Griffin, Chris Paul and Carmelo Anthony.

   Ever since the 1990s, an increasing number of players born outside the
   United States have signed with NBA teams, sparking league interest in
   different parts of the world. Among the notable foreign-born players in
   the NBA today are two-time MVP Steve Nash (a South Africa-born
   Canadian), 2007 Finals MVP Tony Parker (France), and 11 time all-star
   Dirk Nowitzki (Germany), the first European to win the NBA Most
   Valuable Player Award.

   Aside from its huge popularity as a high school and college sport in
   Indiana and Kentucky, basketball may also be the most popular
   professional sport in cities during particular periods when the local
   NBA team may be enjoying an era of remarkable success, such as in
   Chicago during the dynasty days of the Chicago Bulls and Michael Jordan
   during the 1990s, or in Los Angeles ever since the Los Angeles Lakers
   developed as a perennial powerhouse and title contender since the
   1980s, becoming the most popular sports team in the city^[citation
   needed] and the league's glamor team in part due to the many Hollywood
   stars regularly attending their games. Professional basketball is also
   primarily followed in cities where there are no other sports teams in
   the four major professional leagues, such as in the case of the
   Oklahoma City Thunder,^[17] the Sacramento Kings, the San Antonio
   Spurs, or the Portland Trail Blazers. New York City has also had a long
   historical connection with college and professional basketball, and
   many basketball legends initially developed their reputations playing
   in the many playgrounds throughout the city. Madison Square Garden, the
   home arena of the New York Knicks, is often referred to as the "Mecca
   of basketball."

Ice hockey[edit]

   Main articles: National Hockey League, American Hockey League and ECHL
   Joe Louis Arena, home to the Detroit Red Wings of the National Hockey
   League.

   Ice hockey is another popular sport in the United States. The sport is
   commonly referred to simply as "hockey." In the U.S. the game is most
   popular in regions of the country with a cold winter climate, namely
   the northeast and the upper Midwest. However, since the 1990s, hockey
   has become increasingly popular in the Sun Belt due in large part to
   the expansion of the National Hockey League to the southeast and
   southwest U.S., coupled with the mass relocation of many residents from
   northern cities with strong hockey support to these Sun Belt locations.

   The NHL is the major professional hockey league in North America, with
   23 U.S.-based teams and 7 Canadian-based teams competing for the
   Stanley Cup. While NHL stars are still not as readily familiar to the
   general American public as are stars of the NFL, MLB, and the NBA,
   average attendance for NHL games in the U.S. has been steadily
   increasing,^[citation needed] and has surpassed average NBA attendance
   in recent seasons,^[when?] buoyed in part by the NHL Winter Classic
   being played in large outdoor stadiums.

   Other professional leagues in the U.S. include the American Hockey
   League and the ECHL. Additionally, nine U.S.-based teams compete in the
   three member leagues of the Canadian Hockey League. USA Hockey is the
   official governing body for amateur hockey in the U.S. The United
   States Hockey Hall of Fame is located in Eveleth, Minnesota.

   One of the nation's greatest ever sporting moments was the "Miracle on
   Ice", which came during the 1980 Winter Olympics when the U.S. hockey
   team beat the Soviet Union 4–3 in the first game of the medal round
   before going on to beat Finland to claim the gold medal.
   After winning the Cup, players traditionally skate around holding the
   trophy above their heads, as Pavel Datsyuk of the Detroit Red Wings
   does here when the Wings captured their 11th cup in 2008

   Historically, the vast majority of NHL players had come from Canada,
   with a small number of Americans (mostly out of the Minnesota, Michigan
   and New England areas). In the 1959–60 NHL season, the league was 97
   percent Canadian, and only one American-born player, Charlie Burns (who
   had grown up in Toronto), was a regular in the league.^[18] Ten years
   later, in 1969–70, the situation had changed little; Canadians made up
   95 percent of the league, and only five American-born players were
   regulars.^[18] Things began to change for Americans due to NHL
   expansion in the late 1960s and early 1970s, as well as the creation of
   the World Hockey Association in the latter decade. At the time, Eastern
   Europeans were largely unavailable for political reasons, and Swedes
   and Finns, though skilled, were seen by many NHL figures as lacking in
   physical and mental toughness. This gave Americans their first real
   opportunity to prove themselves in the league, and by the 1979–80
   season, slightly more than 10 percent of NHL players were
   American-born.^[18]

   The success of European teams, especially the Soviets, against
   Canadians in the 1970s helped to change stereotypes against European
   players.^[18] During the 1970s and 1980s, the first wave of European
   players entered the league, mostly from Sweden, Finland, and Eastern
   Europe. After the fall of communism in Europe, many players from the
   former Soviet bloc flocked to the NHL. The late 2000s (decade) saw
   another surge in the number of American-trained players.^[citation
   needed] Today, the majority of NHL players are Canadian, more than 20%
   are Americans, and virtually all of the remainder are European-trained.
   (For a more complete discussion, see Origin of NHL players.)

   Notable NHL players in history include Wayne Gretzky (leading point
   scorer), Mario Lemieux, Chris Chelios, Guy Lafleur, Steve Yzerman,
   Gordie Howe (6 time MVP), Nicklas Lidstrom, Bobby Hull, and Bobby Orr.
   Famous NHL players today include Sidney Crosby, Alexander Ovechkin, and
   Claude Giroux.

   College hockey has a regional following in the northeastern and upper
   midwestern United States. It is increasingly being used to develop
   players for the NHL and other professional leagues, much in the way
   junior ice hockey does in Canada (the U.S. has junior leagues, the
   United States Hockey League and North American Hockey League, but they
   are more restricted to protect junior players' college eligibility).
   The Frozen Four is college hockey's national championship.

   A variation of ice hockey, played primarily at the recreational level,
   is pond hockey. Several national tournaments are held in the
   northeastern and upper midwestern United States each year.

   Ice hockey competes for "most popular sport" status in areas of
   northern and western New York State, the northern Great Lakes states
   and in some parts of New England. NHL teams such as the Detroit Red
   Wings, the Pittsburgh Penguins, the Boston Bruins, the Philadelphia
   Flyers, and the New York Rangers are among the most popular sports
   teams in their home cities.^[citation needed] Additionally, American
   youth hockey development has made great strides in recent decades.
   While Canada continues to lead the world in youth participation, the
   U.S. now has more youth hockey players than all other countries, apart
   from Canada, combined.^[18] However, as compared to the other major
   sports leagues, the sport has comparatively less fan following among
   minorities in the US, and the majority of players in the NHL are still
   Canadian or European rather than American.

Soccer[edit]

   Main articles: Soccer in the United States, Major League Soccer and
   National Women's Soccer League
   Landon Donovan representing the U.S. at the 2010 World Cup.

   Soccer has been increasing in popularity in the United States in recent
   years. Soccer is played by over 13 million people in the U.S., making
   it the third most played sport in the U.S., more widely played than ice
   hockey and American football. Most Division 1 colleges field both a
   men's and women's varsity soccer team.

   The United States men's national team and women's national team, as
   well as a number of national youth teams, represent the United States
   in international soccer competitions and are governed by the United
   States Soccer Federation (U.S. Soccer). The U.S. men's team is one of
   only seven teams in the world to have qualified for every World Cup
   since 1990.^[19] The U.S. women's team is tied with Germany for most
   Women's World Cup championships, and is the only team that has never
   finished worse than third place in a World Cup.^[20]
   Columbus Crew Stadium, MLS' first soccer-specific stadium.

   Major League Soccer is the premier soccer league in the United States.
   MLS has 19 clubs (16 from the U.S. and 3 from Canada). The 34-game
   schedule runs from mid-March to late October, with the playoffs and
   championship in November. Soccer-specific stadiums continue to be built
   for MLS teams around the country. MLS has a particularly solid
   following in the Pacific Northwest, where there is a strong rivalry
   between the Portland Timbers and Seattle Sounders. Other professional
   men's soccer leagues in the U.S. include the Division II North American
   Soccer League, and the Division III USL Pro.
   Brandi Chastain known for her game-winning penalty in the 1999 World
   Cup final.

   Many American sports fans, as compared to decades ago, now follow
   international soccer competitions such as the World Cup. Soccer fans
   also follow foreign club competitions such as the UEFA Champions League
   and England's Premier League, and there is growing interest in Major
   League Soccer, the top domestic professional league. Younger
   generations of Americans are developing stronger fan appreciation for
   the sport, due to factors such as the U.S. hosting of the 1994 World
   Cup and the formation of Major League Soccer, as well as increased U.S.
   television coverage of soccer competitions. Many immigrants living in
   the United States, also continue to follow soccer as their favorite
   team sport.

   Women's professional soccer in the United States has not seen sustained
   success. The professional women's leagues—the Women's United Soccer
   Association and Women's Professional Soccer—each folded after three
   seasons. U.S. Soccer has since established a new professional league,
   the National Women's Soccer League, which started in 2013. However, at
   the lower levels of the salary scale, the NWSL is effectively
   semi-professional.

   Many notable international soccer players have played in the U.S. in
   NASL — including Pelé, Eusébio, George Best, Franz Beckenbauer, and
   Johan Cruyff — or in MLS — including Roberto Donadoni, Lothar Matthäus,
   David Beckham, and Thierry Henry.

   The best American soccer players enter the U.S. Soccer Hall of Fame.
   Particularly notable American male players in the Hall of Fame include
   Bert Patenaude, Alexi Lalas, Cobi Jones, Tony Meola, Eric Wynalda, and
   Claudio Reyna. Notable female American players in the Hall of Fame
   include Mia Hamm, Kristine Lilly, Brandi Chastain, Julie Foudy, and
   Michelle Akers.

Other team sports[edit]

   Other popular team sports in the United States, measured by number of
   participants, include:
    1. Volleyball (10.7 million)^[6]
    2. Disc Ultimate (4.9 million)^[21]
    3. Lacrosse (684,730)^[22]
    4. Rugby (335,001)^[23]

Lacrosse[edit]

   Main articles: History of lacrosse, College lacrosse, National Lacrosse
   League and Major League Lacrosse

   Lacrosse is a team sport that is believed to have originate with the
   Iroquois, a confederacy of indigenous tribes that reside in Canada and
   what is now upstate New York, and was popular among numerous tribes
   both within and outside the Iroquois in the eastern United States well
   before the arrival of European settlers. The Iroquois field their own
   separate national team, the Iroquois Nationals, in recognition of the
   confederacy's creation of the sport.

   Lacrosse is most popular in the East Coast area. All forms of lacrosse
   are increasing in national popularity.^[citation needed] NLL and MLL
   are the national box and outdoor lacrosse leagues, respectively, and
   have increased their following in recent years, with the NLL slightly
   more popular than MLL. Also, many of the top Division I college
   lacrosse teams draw upwards of 7–10,000 for a game, especially in the
   Mid-Atlantic and New England areas.^[citation needed]
   U.S. Armed Forces Women's Volleyball team during the 3rd Military World
   Games.

Volleyball[edit]

   Main article: Volleyball in the United States

   Volleyball is also a notable sport in the United States, especially at
   the college and university levels. Unlike most Olympic sports which are
   sponsored widely at the collegiate level for both sexes, the support
   for college volleyball is dramatically skewed in favor of the women's
   game. In the 2011–12 school year, over 300 schools in NCAA Division I
   alone (the highest of three NCAA tiers) sponsored women's volleyball at
   the varsity level,^[24] while fewer than 100 schools in all three NCAA
   divisions combined sponsored varsity men's volleyball, with only 23 of
   them in Division I.^[25] This is partially due to Title IX;
   female-oriented sports such as volleyball help balance a college's
   athletic opportunities for women with those for men.

   Beach volleyball has increasingly become popular in the United States,
   in part due to media exposure during the Olympic Games.

Rugby Union[edit]

   Main article: Rugby union in the United States

   Rugby union, popular in other English-speaking nations, is not as well
   known in the United States. Rugby is played recreationally and in
   colleges, though it is not governed by the NCAA (see College rugby).
   There are more than 457,983 registered and unregistered players,^[26]
   with more than a quarter being women. The semi-professional Rugby Super
   League is the premier domestic competition. The U.S. national team
   competes at the Rugby World Cup. In the sevens variation of the sport,
   the men's national team is one of 15 "core teams" that participate in
   every event of the annual IRB Sevens World Series, and the women's
   national team is one of 11 core teams in the IRB Women's Sevens World
   Series.

   Rugby participation in the US has grown significantly in recent years,
   growing by 350% between 2004 and 2011.^[27] A 2010 survey by the
   National Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association ranked rugby as the
   fastest-growing sport in the US.^[28] Rugby's profile in the U.S. has
   received a tremendous boost from the IOC's announcement in 2009 that
   rugby would return to the Olympics in 2016. Since the Olympic
   announcement, rugby events such as the Collegiate Rugby Championship,
   the USA Sevens, and the Rugby World Cup have been broadcast on network
   TV. The USA Sevens, held every year in February, regularly draws more
   than 60,000 fans to Sam Boyd Stadium in Las Vegas.

   Two recent American presidents have been rugby players. Bill Clinton
   developed an interest in rugby in England, playing at Oxford
   University.^[29] George W. Bush was a keen player, during high school
   and University, and was on Yale's 1st XV, and in 1968, he was part of
   their dramatic win over Harvard.^[29]^[30]

   Rugby formed the basis of modern American football; the two sports were
   nearly identical in the late 19th century but diverged into distinct,
   incompatible codes by the start of the 20th.

Cricket[edit]

   This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013)
   Main articles: Cricket in the United States, United States national
   cricket team and History of United States cricket

   Cricket, another common sport in Commonwealth countries, is not a
   popular sport in the U.S., but has a niche market and is slowly growing
   in popularity. Many amateur cricket leagues have been formed by Indian,
   Bangladeshi, Pakistani, Australian, South African, English and
   Caribbean immigrants, and as a result, the sport has made limited
   inroads because of a large influx of migrants from cricketing countries
   who make up almost 16 million of the American population.^[31] Cricket
   used to be the most popular sport in America during the 18th and early
   19th centuries,^[citation needed] when it suffered a rapid decline as
   the homegrown sport of baseball overtook cricket as the bat-and-ball
   code of choice. The first intercollegiate tournament in America was a
   cricket tournament.^[citation needed]

   The first annual Canada vs. U.S. cricket match, played since the 1840s,
   was attended by 10,000 spectators at Bloomingdale Park in New
   York.^[citation needed] The U.S. vs. Canada cricket match is the oldest
   international sporting event in the modern world, pre-dating even
   today's Olympic Games by nearly 50 years.^[citation needed]

   The U.S. participated in the 2004 ICC Champions Trophy where they were
   comprehensively beaten by Australia and New Zealand. United States of
   America Cricket Association governs the professional Cricket in the
   country. United States Cricket team currently plays in World Cricket
   League Division IV to work their way up to 2013 Cricket World Cup
   Qualifier in order to enter 2015 Cricket World Cup. In 2011, they
   played Americas Region Twenty20 Division One tournament and qualified
   for the 2012 ICC World Twenty20 Qualifier. United States Cricket team
   also plays in the ICC Americas Championship and were qualified for ICC
   Intercontinental Cup in the past.

   United States Youth Cricket Association formed in 2010 to develop the
   interest in sport among the young kids. Cricket is one of the most
   watched pay per view sports in the U.S.,^[citation needed] and multiple
   channels are provided by DirecTv, Dish Network and Comcast TV services.
   Starting 2012, ESPN will broadcast Cricket on ESPN3 and on its regular
   channels.^[32] The only professional Cricket Stadium in the U.S. is
   Central Broward Regional Park located in Lauderhill, Florida. The Leo
   Magnus Cricket Complex in Los Angeles and Philadelphia Cricket Club in
   Philadelphia are few other established Cricket Grounds in the country.

Ultimate and Disc Sports (Frisbee)[edit]

   Main article: Ken Westerfield
   Disc ultimate is the most popular game of all the disc sports

   Alternative sports, using the flying disc, began in the mid-sixties. As
   numbers of young people became alienated from social norms, they
   resisted and looked for alternative recreational activities, including
   that of throwing a Frisbee.^[33] What started with a few players like
   Victor Malafronte, Z Weyand and Ken Westerfield experimenting with new
   ways of throwing and catching a Frisbee, later would become known as
   playing freestyle.^[34] Organized disc sports, in the 1970s, began with
   promotional efforts from Wham-O, a few tournaments and professionals
   using Frisbee show tours to perform at universities, fairs and sporting
   events. Disc sports such as freestyle, double disc court, guts, disc
   ultimate and disc golf became this sports first events.^[35]^[36] Two
   events, the team sport of disc ultimate and disc golf are very popular
   worldwide and are now being played professionally.^[37]^[38] The World
   Flying Disc Federation, Professional Disc Golf Association, and the
   Freestyle Players Association, are the official rules and sanctioning
   organizations for flying disc sports worldwide.

   Disc ultimate is a team sport played with a flying disc. The object of
   the game is to score points by passing the disc to members of your own
   team, on a rectangular field, 120 yards (110m) by 40 yards (37m), until
   you have successfully completed a pass to a team member in the opposing
   teams end zone. There are currently over four million people that play
   some form of organized ultimate in the US. Ultimate is also being
   played professionally with two newly formed leagues, the American
   Ultimate Disc League (AUDL) and Major League Ultimate (MLU).

Other sports[edit]

   Australian rules football in the United States is a fast-growing team
   and spectator sport that^[citation needed] was first played in the
   country in 1996.^[39] The United States Australian Football League is
   the governing body for the sport in the U.S., with various clubs and
   leagues around the country. The National Championships are held
   annually. The United States men's national Australian rules football
   team and the women's national team both regularly play international
   matches and play in the Australian Football International Cup, a
   tournament for all competing countries apart from Australia.

   Curling is popular in northern states,^[citation needed] possibly
   because of climate, proximity to Canada, or Scandinavian heritage. The
   national popularity of curling is growing after significant media
   coverage of the sport in the 2006 and 2010 Winter Olympics.^[citation
   needed]

   Gaelic football and hurling are governed by North American GAA and New
   York GAA. They do not have a high profile, but are developing sports,
   with New York fielding a representative team in the All-Ireland Senior
   Football Championship.

   Team handball, a common sport in European countries, is seldom seen in
   the United States. The sport is mostly played in the country on the
   amateur level. Handball is played in the Summer Olympics, but is not
   sanctioned by the NCAA; all college and university teams play as club
   teams. The sport's governing body is USA Team Handball.

   Inline hockey was invented by Americans as a way to play the sport in
   all climates. The PIHA is the league with the largest number of
   professional teams in the nation. Street hockey is a non-standard
   version of inline hockey played by amateurs in informal games.

   Water polo does not have a professional competition in the U.S., so the
   highest level of competitive play is at the college level and in the
   Olympics. The NCAA sanctions water polo as a varsity sport for both men
   and women, but sport is not popular in the U.S. beyond the west coast,
   and no team outside of California has ever reached the finals of the
   NCAA Division I men's water polo championship.

Other team recreational activities[edit]

   Angleball is a high fitness sport developed in the 1940s by College
   Hall of Fame football coach Rip Engle as a way for players to maintain
   physical fitness in the off-season. It has light contact and minimal
   rules.^[40] Angleball is used for muscle conditioning in the NFL, and
   for fun by colleges, schools, camps and all-age groups. Because of
   angleball's light contact gameplay that emphasizes skill, accuracy and
   endurance, it has been called the best game ever developed for groups
   up to 40 composed of mixed ages and genders.^[citation needed]
   Angleball gameplay is simple. Two large balls are placed atop standards
   (normally 10' tall posts with a 10' radius circle around the post) at
   opposite sides of a field. Teams pass a smaller ball back and forth,
   attempting to knock the other team's ball off its perch with the
   smaller ball. An offensive player who is touched by a defensive player
   cannot shoot for a goal and has three seconds to pass the ball.

   Capture the flag is played recreationally by adults and children.

   Dodgeball is played traditionally by children in school, though adult
   leagues in urban areas have formed within the past 10 years. A
   caricatured version was portrayed in the 2004 film comedy Dodgeball: A
   True Underdog Story.

   Kickball is also played recreationally by adults and children,
   especially at the elementary school level. Its rules are largely
   identical to baseball, except that no bat is used and instead a large
   rubber ball is rolled along the ground for the "batter" to kick.

   Roller derby is a contact sport played on roller skates that has had
   brief surges of popularity throughout the 20th and 21st centuries.
   Roller Derby was portrayed in the 2009 film Whip It and in the 2012
   documentary "Derby, Baby! A story of love, addiction and rink rash"
   Since September 2009, there were 350 women's, men's, and junior leagues
   in the U.S.A.^[41] There are multiple Associations that govern roller
   derby: JRDA = Junior Roller Derby Association MADE = Modern Athletic
   Derby Endeavor MRDA = Men's Roller Derby Association OSDA = Old School
   Derby Association RDCL = Roller Derby Coalition of Leagues USARS = USA
   Roller Sports WFTDA = Women's Flat Track Derby Association WFTDA-AL =
   WFTDA Apprentice

Organization of American sports[edit]

Amateur sports[edit]

   A smiling, elderly man is shown from the waist up. He is shaking
   someone's hand, but that person is out of the picture. The man is
   wearing a dark suit with a yellow boutonniere. He has thin white hair
   and large glasses. He is standing in front of a blue screen that has
   the script "UCLA" logo on it in yellow letters.
   John Wooden, UCLA basketball coaching legend.

   The extent in the United States to which sports are associated with
   secondary and tertiary education is rare among nations. Millions of
   students participate in athletics programs operated by high schools and
   colleges. Student-athletes often receive scholarships to colleges in
   recognition of their athletic potential. Currently, the largest
   governing body of collegiate sports is the National Collegiate Athletic
   Association (NCAA).
   Pre-game activities at University of Tennessee football game

   High school and college sports fill the developmental role that in many
   other countries would be the place of youth teams associated with
   clubs. The major professional sports leagues operate drafts once a
   year, in which each league's teams selected eligible prospects.
   Eligibility differs from league to league. Baseball and ice hockey
   operate minor league systems for players who have finished education
   but are not ready or good enough for the major leagues. The NBA also
   has a development league for players who are not ready to play at the
   top level.

   Especially in basketball and football, high school and particularly
   college sports are followed with a fervor equaling or exceeding that
   felt for professional sports; college football games can draw six-digit
   crowds and, for upper-tier schools, sports are a significant source of
   revenue.

Professional sports[edit]

   See also: Major professional sports leagues in the United States and
   Canada

   For the most part, there is no system of promotion and relegation in
   American professional sports. Major sports leagues operate as
   associations of franchises. The same 30–32 teams play in the league
   each year unless they move to another city or the league chooses to
   expand with new franchises.

   All American sports leagues use the same type of schedule. After the
   regular season, the 10–16 teams with the best records enter a playoff
   tournament leading to a championship series or game. American sports,
   except for soccer, have no equivalent to the cup competitions that run
   concurrently with leagues in European sports. Even in the case of
   soccer, the cup competition, the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup, draws
   considerably less attention than the regular season. Also, the only
   top-level U.S. professional teams that play teams from other
   organizations in meaningful games are those in MLS. Since the 2012
   season, all U.S.-based MLS teams have automatically qualified for the
   U.S. Open Cup, in which they compete against teams from lower-level
   U.S. leagues. In addition, four of these teams qualify to play clubs
   from countries outside the U.S. and Canada in the CONCACAF Champions
   League. NBA teams have played European teams in preseason exhibitions
   on a semi-regular basis, and recent MLS All-Star Games have pitted top
   players from the league against major European soccer teams, such as
   members of the Premier League.

   International competition is not as important in American sports as it
   is in the sporting culture of most other countries, although Olympic
   ice-hockey and basketball tournaments do generate attention. The first
   international baseball tournament with top-level players, the World
   Baseball Classic, also generated some positive reviews after its
   inaugural tournament in 2006.

Government regulation[edit]

   No American government agency is charged with overseeing sports.
   However, the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports advises
   the President through the Secretary of Health and Human Services about
   physical activity, fitness, and sports, and recommends programs to
   promote regular physical activity for the health of all Americans. The
   U.S. Congress has chartered the United States Olympic Committee to
   govern American participation in the Olympic Movement and promote
   amateur sports. Congress has also involved itself in several aspects of
   sports, notably gender equity in college athletics, illegal drugs in
   pro sports, sports broadcasting and the application of antitrust law to
   sports leagues.

Sports media in the United States[edit]

   See also: List of TV markets and major sports teams in the United
   States

   Sports have been a major part of American broadcasting since the early
   days of radio. Today, television networks and radio networks pay
   millions (sometimes billions) of dollars for the rights to broadcast
   sporting events. Contracts between leagues and broadcasters stipulate
   how often games must be interrupted for commercials. Because of all of
   the advertisements, broadcasting contracts are very lucrative and
   account for the biggest chunk of pro teams' revenues. Broadcasters also
   covet the television contracts for the major sports leagues (especially
   in the case of the NFL) in order to amplify their ability to promote
   their programming to the audience, especially young and middle-aged
   adult males.

   The advent of cable and satellite television has greatly expanded
   sports offerings on American TV. ESPN, the first all-sports cable
   network in the U.S., went on the air in 1979. It has been followed by
   several sister networks and competitors.

   Many of the professional sports teams run their own cable networks.
   Yankees owner George Steinbrenner started the YES Network which
   broadcasts primarily Yankees games and television shows. His starting
   of his own network led to almost all teams having a station for their
   franchises.

   Despite the size of the sports market in the U.S., the country does not
   have a national daily sports newspaper. This is because the contiguous
   48 states spread across four time zones, and games on the West Coast
   may not end until early morning in the East (resulting in the
   phenomenon of East Coast bias). This makes it difficult to distribute a
   national newspaper with the scores of late games in time for morning
   delivery. However, there are many weekly American sports magazines, the
   best-known being Sports Illustrated and The Sporting News, and the
   development of the Internet also has allowed for national sports Web
   sites to flourish.

   Sports are also widely broadcast at the local level, ranging from
   college and professional sports down to (on some smaller stations)
   recreational and youth leagues. Internet radio has allowed these
   broadcasts to reach a worldwide audience.

Most popular sports in the United States[edit]

   In the broadest definition of sports—physical recreation of all
   sorts—the four most popular sports among the general population of the
   United States are exercise walking (90 million), exercising with
   equipment (53 million), swimming (52 million) and camping (47 million).
   The most popular competitive sport (and fifth most popular recreational
   sport) is bowling (43 million). Other most popular sports are fishing
   (35 million), bicycling (37 million), weightlifting (33 million),
   aerobics (30 million), and hiking (28 million).^[4]

   According to the 2013 Harris Poll, the six sports with most fans are
   American football (46%), baseball (14%), basketball (10%), auto racing
   (7%), ice hockey (5%) and tennis (3%).^[42] In the 1985 poll, 31% of
   fans preferred football, 23% baseball, 12% basketball, 5% auto racing
   and 5% tennis.

Baseball vs. Football[edit]

   See also: History of American football § NFL supremacy (1958–present)

   Though baseball has historically been called the "national pastime",
   American football has considerably grown in popularity with the advent
   of television over the last several decades. Most debates about
   "America's most popular sport" tend to center on the degree of
   Americans' identification with either of these two games; the question
   is a difficult one to resolve.^[43]

   Advocates of baseball point to the overwhelming number of baseball
   tickets sold annually in the United States and Canada, compared to NFL
   football. It is likely that the average American sports fan will attend
   many more major league baseball games than NFL football games in his or
   her lifetime, due in part to baseball's longer schedule and football's
   (generally) higher ticket prices.

   Advocates of football, in turn, point to football's large television
   audience, including the Super Bowl, though the sport is also facing
   some negative publicity in the world of youth sports due to media
   coverage of documented health and injury risks posed to players,
   including the potential long-term health concerns which concussions
   pose for children or teenagers.^[44]^[45] Certain teams of both sports,
   such as the Green Bay Packers, Boston Red Sox,^[46] New York Yankees,
   St. Louis Cardinals,^[47] New England Patriots, Oakland Raiders and
   Pittsburgh Steelers,^[48] have cultivated famously loyal fan bases
   across the country.

   In many cases, identification with a certain football or baseball team
   is a matter of family inheritance going back many generations and local
   identity. Furthermore, the popularity of each, as well as of other
   major team sports, may vary depending on region, ethnicity and age.

Organized college and high school sports[edit]

   See also: College athletics and National Federation of State High
   School Associations
   High school cheerleaders

   The most popular college sports, measured by NCAA reporting on varsity
   team participation,^[49] are: (1) football (64,000), (2)
   baseball/softball (47,000), (3) track and field (46,000),^[50] (4)
   soccer (43,000), (5) basketball (32,000), (6) cross-country running
   (25,000), and (7) swimming/diving (20,000). The most popular sport
   among female athletes is soccer, followed closely by track and
   field.^[13]

   Among organized high school sports, the sports with the highest number
   of participants are: (1) football, (2) basketball, (3) track & field,
   (4) baseball/softball, (5) soccer, and (6) cross-country. Wrestling is
   the sixth most popular sport for boys, while volleyball is the third
   most popular sport for girls.^[51]

   Popular high school sports in various regions of the U.S. include the
   Texas High School Football championships, the Indiana Basketball
   championships, and ice hockey in Minnesota.

Sports Leagues in the United States[edit]

The Five Major Sports Leagues[edit]

   The following table shows the major professional sports leagues, which
   average over 15,000 fans per game and that have a national TV contract
   that pays rights fees.
   League Sport Teams National TV contract Average
   Attendance
   National Football League American football 32 (Multiple)
   700467604000000000067,604
   Major League Baseball Baseball 30 Fox, FS1, ESPN, TBS
   700430451000000000030,451
   Major League Soccer^1 Soccer 19* ESPN, NBC, NBCSN
   700418608000000000018,608
   National Basketball Association Basketball 30 ABC, ESPN, TNT 17,347
   National Hockey League Ice hockey 30 NBC, NBCSN 17,720
    1. Major League Soccer will add two expansion teams in 2015, growing
       to 21 teams.

Other Team Sports Leagues[edit]

     * United States Australian Football League (USAFL)
     * American National Rugby League (AMNRL)
     * American Ultimate Disc League (AUDL)
     * Arena Football League (AFL)
     * Association of Volleyball Professionals (AVP)
     * Major Indoor Soccer League (MISL)
     * Major League Lacrosse (MLL)
     * Major League Ultimate (MLU)
     * National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)
     * National Lacrosse League (NLL)
     * National Pro Fastpitch
     * National Women's Soccer League (NWSL)
     * North American Soccer League (NASL)
     * Professional Inline Hockey Association (PIHA)
     * Rugby Super League (RSL)
     * United Football League (2009) (UFL)
     * United States of America Cricket Association (USACA)
     * USA Rugby League (USARL)
     * USL Professional Division (USL-Pro)
     * Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA)
     * Xtreme Soccer League (XSL)

Other Individual Sports Leagues[edit]

     * Bellator Fighting Championships
     * Champions Tour, for men's golfers 50 and over; operated by the PGA
       Tour
     * Grand-Am Road Racing
     * IndyCar (was Indy Racing League (IRL), merged with Champ Car)
     * International Motor Sports Association (IMSA, sanctions ALMS)
     * LPGA Tour
     * National Association of Stock Car Automobile Racing (NASCAR)
     * National Hot Rod Association (NHRA)
     * PBA Tour
     * Professional Bull Riders (PBR)
     * PGA Tour
     * Professional Disc Golf Association (PDGA)
     * Ring Of Honor Wrestling (ROH)
     * TNA Wrestling
     * Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC)
     * United States Bowling Congress (USBC)
     * United States Tennis Association (USTA)
     * USA Cycling (USAC)
     * USA Swimming (USA-S)
     * World Juggling Federation (WJF)
     * World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE)

See also[edit]

     * Doping in the United States
     * United States at the team sports international competitions
     * Sports Museum of America
     * Professional sports in the Western United States
     * Record attendances in United States club soccer

References[edit]

    1. ^ SpeedTV.com My Take on Open Wheel Racing In America Accessed
       2008-07-22
    2. ^ Oreovicz, John (2008-01-06). "American open-wheel racing held
       hostage: Year 13". ESPN.com. Retrieved 2008-01-06.
    3. ^ "After 12 years of conflict, IRL and Champ Car merge". ESPN.com.
       Associated Press. 2008-02-22. Retrieved 2008-02-22.
    4. ^ ^a ^b
       http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2010/tables/10s1212.pdf
    5. ^ Sports Business Journal, Fan base complexity sets up intense
       competition for attention, June 27, 2011,
       http://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Journal/Issues/2011/06/27/Resear
       ch-and-Ratings/Up-Next.aspx
    6. ^ ^a ^b U.S. Census Bureau, Participation in Selected Sports
       Activities: 2009,
       http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s1249.pdf
    7. ^ "2014 Superbowl"
    8. ^ "2001 World Series game 7"
    9. ^ "2010 NBA finals game 7"
   10. ^ "2014 World Cup final"
   11. ^ "2011 Stanley Cup game 7"
   12. ^ http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2010/tables/10s1211.pdf
   13. ^ ^a ^b
       http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2010/tables/10s1210.pdf
   14. ^
       http://books.google.com/books?id=JyqbTl9fsc4C&pg=PA214&lpg=PA214&dq
       =great+plains+states+football+population&source=bl&ots=CCQWdoeJU4&s
       ig=wiFnbsKlziTMb1fgBHYgLgch27Q&hl=en&sa=X&ei=4bwuUbOdBMOEygHnpoHIAg
       &ved=0CGMQ6AEwBw#v=onepage&q=great%20plains%20states%20football%20p
       opulation&f=false
   15. ^ "Harris Poll of top sports: 2006".
   16. ^ "largest Indiana high school gymnasiums".
       Indianahsbasketball.homestead.com. Retrieved 2012-09-04.
   17. ^ Simmons, Bill (June 13, 2012). "Thunder Family Values".
       Grantland.com. Retrieved July 13, 2012.
   18. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e Dryden, Ken (February 20, 2014). "Miracle Off
       Ice". Grantland.com. Retrieved February 20, 2014.
   19. ^
       National_team_appearances_in_the_FIFA_World_Cup#Ranking_of_teams_by
       _number_of_appearances
   20. ^ FIFA Women's World Cup
   21. ^ http://www.cnbc.com/id/30138012
   22. ^ U.S. Lacrosse, 2011 Participation Survey,
       http://www.uslacrosse.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=tIqhe4P9DsM%3D&
       tabid=14645
   23. ^ International Rugby Board, Year in Review 2012, page 46,
       http://www.irb.com/mm/document/newsmedia/mediazone/02/06/57/96/638i
       rbyir2012lrv3.pdf
   24. ^ "2011-12 Participation Study – Women's Sports". NCAA Sports
       Sponsorship and Participation Rates Report, 1981–82 – 2011–12.
       NCAA. October 2012. p. 71. Retrieved January 4, 2013.
   25. ^ "2011-12 Participation Study – Men's Sports". NCAA Sports
       Sponsorship and Participation Rates Report, 1981–82 – 2011–12.
       NCAA. October 2012. p. 72. Retrieved January 4, 2013.
   26. ^ "USA country profile". International Rugby Board. Retrieved
       2008-01-16.
   27. ^
       http://www.irb.com/mm/Document/NewsMedia/MediaZone/02/04/22/88/2042
       288_PDF.pdf
   28. ^ Denver Post
       http://yourhub.denverpost.com/arvada/rugby-is-now-fastest-growing-s
       port-u-s-and/mM6cGwQx7GZ84C2xyISydO-ugc |url= missing title
       (help).
   29. ^ ^a ^b Cain, Nick & Growden, Greg "Chapter 21: Ten Peculiar Facts
       about Rugby" in Rugby Union for Dummies (2nd Edition), p297 (pub:
       John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, England) ISBN 978-0-470-03537-5
   30. ^ Clarke, Wes Famous Ruggers, retrieved August 24, 2009
   31. ^ Donahe, Tom (August 11, 2014). Cricket is again making a hit in
       the U.S.; Olean teams part of resurgence in game’s popularity.
       Olean Times Herald. Retrieved August 11, 2014.
   32. ^ "USA news: ESPN buys US rights for 2015 World Cup | USA Cricket
       News". ESPN Cricinfo. Retrieved 2012-09-04.
   33. ^ Jordan Holtzman-Conston (2010). Countercultural Sports in
       America: The History and Meaning of Ultimate Frisbee. Waltham,
       Mass. ASIN 3838311957.
   34. ^ "Freestyle Players Association". The History of Flying Disc
       Freestyle. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
   35. ^ "World Flying Disc Federation". WFDF Official Website. Retrieved
       October 19, 2013.
   36. ^ "World Flying Disc Federation". History of the Flying Disc.
       Retrieved October 20, 2013.
   37. ^ "Professional Disc Golf Association". PDGA Official Website.
       Retrieved October 19, 2013.
   38. ^ "American Ultimate Disc League". AUDL Official Website. Retrieved
       October 20, 2013.
   39. ^ "MAAFL History". Mid American Australian Football League. 2005.
       Retrieved Sep 30, 2012.
   40. ^ Vickey, Ted (2008). 101 Fitness Games for Kids at Camp. Coaches
       Choice Books. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-58518-070-7.
   41. ^ Roller Derby Worldwide
   42. ^ As American as Mom, Apple Pie and Football? - Harris Interactive,
       16 January 2014
   43. ^ Wrestlezone Forums online debate,
       http://forums.wrestlezone.com/archive/index.php/t-109378.html
   44. ^ NYTimes article:N.F.L. Acknowledges Long-Term Concussion Effects,
       http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/21/sports/football/21concussions.htm
       l.
   45. ^ Zirin, Dave (2010-03-18). "The NFL's Concussion Conundrum".
       Huffington Post.
   46. ^ Red Sox Nation
   47. ^ Best Fans in Baseball,
       http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1219254-mlb-power-rankings-the-w
       orst-fan-bases-in-baseball/page/31
   48. ^ "NFL's best fans? We gotta hand it to Steelers (barely) - NFL -
       ESPN". Sports.espn.go.com. 2008-08-29. Retrieved 2012-09-04.
   49. ^ The NCAA defines a participant as someone who "as of the day of
       the varsity team's first scheduled contest: (a) is listed as a team
       member; (b) practices with the varsity team and receives coaching
       from one or more varsity coaches; or (c)received
       athletically-related student aid."
   50. ^ The NCAA does not give a number for total track and field, but
       breaks the figures into outdoor and indoor. The number given is for
       outdoor track and field. The total is likely to be somewhat higher.
   51. ^ National Federation of State High School Associations,
       Indianapolis, The 2007–2008 High School Athletics Participation
       Survey

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sports in the United States.

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Sport in North America
   Sovereign states
     * Antigua and Barbuda
     * Bahamas
     * Barbados
     * Belize
     * Canada
     * Costa Rica
     * Cuba
     * Dominica
     * Dominican Republic
     * El Salvador
     * Grenada
     * Guatemala
     * Haiti
     * Honduras
     * Jamaica
     * Mexico
     * Nicaragua
     * Panama
     * Saint Kitts and Nevis
     * Saint Lucia
     * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
     * Trinidad and Tobago
     * United States

   The North American continent with country borders
   Dependencies and other territories
     * Anguilla
     * Aruba
     * Bermuda
     * British Virgin Islands
     * Cayman Islands
     * Greenland
     * Guadeloupe
     * Martinique
     * Montserrat
     * Netherlands Antilles
     * Puerto Rico
     * Saint Barthélemy
     * Saint Martin
     * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
     * Turks and Caicos Islands
     * U.S. Virgin Islands


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Sports in the United States
   By state/territory
     * Alabama
     * Alaska
     * Arizona
     * Arkansas
     * California
     * Colorado
     * Connecticut
     * Delaware
     * Florida
     * Georgia
     * Hawaii
     * Idaho
     * Illinois
     * Indiana
     * Iowa
     * Kansas
     * Kentucky
     * Louisiana
     * Maine
     * Maryland
     * Massachusetts
     * Michigan
     * Minnesota
     * Mississippi
     * Missouri
     * Montana
     * Nebraska
     * Nevada
     * New Hampshire
     * New Jersey
     * New Mexico
     * New York
     * North Carolina
     * North Dakota
     * Ohio
     * Oklahoma
     * Oregon
     * Pennsylvania
     * Rhode Island
     * South Carolina
     * South Dakota
     * Tennessee
     * Texas
     * Utah
     * Vermont
     * Virginia
     * Washington state
     * Washington, D.C.
     * West Virginia
     * Wisconsin
     * Wyoming

     * American Samoa
     * Guam
     * Northern Mariana Islands
     * Puerto Rico
     * U.S. Virgin Islands

   Major sports
     * Athletics
     * American football
     * Baseball
     * Basketball
     * Boxing
     * Golf
     * Horse racing (Thoroughbred, Harness, and Steeplechase)
     * Ice hockey
     * Lacrosse
     * Motorsport
     * Rugby union
     * Soccer
     * Surfing
     * Swimming
     * Tennis
     * Winter sports (skeleton, skiing)
     * Women's sports

   Minor sports
     * Australian rules football
     * Badminton
     * Bodybuilding
     * Cricket
     * Cycling
     * Fishing
     * Futsal
     * Field hockey
     * Gaelic football in the United States
     * Netball
     * Polo
     * Pro Wrestling
     * Roller derby
     * Rowing
     * Rugby league
     * Softball
     * Volleyball
     * Wrestling

   International sporting competitions
     * Baseball World Cup
     * Cricket World Cup
     * FIFA Confederations Cup
     * FIFA World Cup
     * Maccabiah
     * Olympics (Summer, Winter)
     * Pan American Games
     * Paralympics
     * Rugby World Cup
     * Universiade


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Life in the United States
     * Affluence
     * Crime
     * Culture
     * Economic issues
     * Education (attainment)
     * Family structure
     * Health care
     * Health insurance
     * Holidays
     * Income (Household
     * Personal)
     * Income inequality
     * Homelessness
     * Homeownership
     * Human rights
     * Labor unions
     * Languages
     * Middle class
     * Passenger vehicle transport
     * Political ideologies
     * Poverty
     * Race
     * Religion
     * Social class
     * Society
     * Sports
     * Standard of living
     * Wealth


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Sports governing bodies of the United States (USA)
   Summer Olympic Sports
     * Aquatics
          + Diving
          + Swimming
          + Synchronized Swimming
          + Water polo
     * Archery
     * Athletics
     * Badminton
     * Basketball
     * Boxing
     * Canoeing
     * Cycling
     * Equestrian
     * Fencing
     * Field Hockey
     * Football
     * Golf
     * Gymnastics
     * Handball
     * Judo
     * Modern pentathlon
     * Rugby 7's
     * Rowing
     * Sailing
     * Shooting
     * Table Tennis
     * Taekwondo
     * Tennis
     * Triathlon
     * Volleyball
          + inc. Beach
     * Weightlifting
     * Wrestling

   Flag of the United States.svg
   Winter Olympic Sports
     * Biathlon
     * Bobsleigh
     * Curling
     * Skating
          + Figure
          + Speed
          + Short Track
     * Ice hockey
     * Luge
     * Skeleton
     * Skiing
          + Alpine
          + Cross Country
          + Nordic Combined
          + Freestyle
          + Jumping
     * Snowboarding

   Other IOC Recognised Sports
     * Air sports
     * Auto racing
     * Bandy
     * Baseball
     * Billiard sports
     * Boules
     * Bowling
     * Bridge
     * Chess
     * Cricket
     * Dance sport
     * Floorball
     * Karate
     * Korfball
     * Lifesaving
     * Motorcycle racing
     * Mountaineering and Climbing
     * Netball
     * Orienteering
     * Pelota Vasca
     * Polo
     * Powerboating
     * Racquetball
     * Roller sports
     * Rugby Union
     * Softball
     * Sport climbing
     * Squash
     * Sumo
     * Surfing
     * Tug of war
     * Underwater sports
     * Water ski
     * Wushu

   Other Sports
     * Australian rules football
     * American Football
     * Rugby League
     * Snooker

     * United States Olympic Committee
     * United States Paralympic Committee

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_in_the_United_States&
   oldid=625589944"
   Categories:
     * Sports in the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * Pages with citations having bare URLs
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2014
     * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2013
     * Vague or ambiguous time from December 2013
     * Articles needing additional references from February 2013
     * All articles needing additional references
     * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013
     * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013
     * Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 日本語
     * Português
     * Русский
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 14 September 2014 at 23:49.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
