   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

State court (United States)

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
                   United States
   Great Seal of the United States (obverse).svg
   This article is part of a series on the
   politics and government of
   the United States
   Federal government
     * Constitution
     * Law
     * Taxation

   Legislature
     * Congress
          + House
               o Speaker
               o Party leaders
               o Congressional districts
          + Senate
               o President pro tempore
               o Party leaders

   Executive
     * President
     * Vice President
     * Cabinet
     * Federal agencies

   Judiciary
     * Supreme Court
     * Courts of Appeals
     * District Courts
     * Other tribunals

   Elections
     * Presidential elections
     * Midterm elections
     * Off-year elections

   Political parties
     * Democratic
     * Republican
     * Third parties

   Federalism
     * State government
          + Governors
          + Legislatures (List)
          + State courts
     * Local government

     * Other countries
     * Atlas

   Portal icon Politics portal
     * v
     * t
     * e

   In the United States, a state court has jurisdiction over disputes with
   some connection to a U.S. state, as opposed to the federal government.
   State courts handle the vast majority of civil and criminal cases in
   the United States with federal court supervision varying in scope from
   minimal to overarching, depending on the area of law and the specific
   case facts.

Contents

     * 1 Types of state courts
     * 2 State court judges
     * 3 Differences among the states
     * 4 Nature of matters handled in state courts
          + 4.1 Civil cases
          + 4.2 Criminal cases
     * 5 Administration
          + 5.1 State court regulation of lawyers
     * 6 Relationship to federal courts
     * 7 Nomenclature
     * 8 See also
     * 9 References
     * 10 External links and references

Types of state courts[edit]

   Cases in state courts begin in a trial court where suits are filed and
   evidence is eventually presented if a case proceeds to a hearing or
   trial. Trials in these courts are often held only after extensive
   pre-trial procedures that in more than 90% of cases lead to a default
   judgment in a civil case, an agreed resolution settling the case, or
   pre-trial resolution of the case by a judge on the merits. Territory
   outside of any state in the United States, such as the District of
   Columbia or American Samoa, often have courts established under federal
   or territorial law which substitute for a state court system, distinct
   from the ordinary federal court system.

   State trial courts are usually located in a courthouse in the county
   seat. Even when state trial courts include more than one county in a
   judicial district, it isn't uncommon for the state trial court to hold
   regular sessions at each county seat in its jurisdiction and function
   from the point of view of litigants as if it were a county based court.

   If one of the litigants is unsatisfied with the decision of the lower
   court, the matter may be taken up on appeal (but an acquittal in a
   criminal trial may not be appealed by the state due to the Fifth
   Amendment protection against double jeopardy). Usually, an intermediate
   appellate court, if there is one in that state, often called the state
   court of appeals, will review the decision of the trial court. If still
   unsatisfied, the litigant can appeal to the highest appellate court in
   the state, which is usually called the state supreme court and is
   usually located in or near the state capital. Appellate courts in the
   United States, unlike their civil law counterparts, are generally not
   permitted to correct mistakes concerning the facts of the case on
   appeal, only mistakes of law, or findings of fact with no support in
   the trial court record.

   Many states have courts of limited jurisdiction (inferior
   jurisdiction), presided over by, for example, a magistrate or justice
   of the peace who hears criminal arraignments and tries petty offenses
   and small civil cases. Appeals from courts of limited jurisdiction are
   frequently sent to state trial courts of general jurisdiction rather
   than to an appellate court.

   Larger cities often have city courts (also known as municipal courts)
   which hear traffic offenses and violations of city ordinances; in some
   states, such as New York State, these courts also have broader
   jurisdictions as inferior jurisdiction courts and can handle small
   civil claims and misdemeanors. Other courts of limited jurisdiction
   include alderman's courts, police court, mayor's courts, recorder's
   courts, county courts, probate courts, municipal courts, juvenile
   courts, courts of claims, courts of common pleas, family courts, small
   claims courts, tax courts, water courts (present in some western states
   such as Colorado and Montana), and workers' compensation courts. Many
   states follow the federal government practice of having one or more
   separate systems of administrative law judges in the executive branch
   in addition to judicial branch judges, for example, to handle driver's
   license revocations, unemployment insurance claims, or land use
   disputes.

   All these courts are distinguished from courts of general jurisdiction
   (also known as "superior jurisdiction"), which are the default type of
   trial court that can hear any case which is not required to be first
   heard in a court of limited jurisdiction. Most such cases are civil
   cases involving large sums of money or criminal trials arising from
   serious crimes like rape and murder. Typically, felonies are handled in
   general jurisdiction courts, while misdemeanors and other lesser
   offenses are handled in inferior jurisdiction courts. Unlike most
   European courts (in both common law and civil law countries), American
   state courts do not usually have a separate court that handles serious
   crimes; jurisdiction lies with the court that handles all other felony
   cases in a given county. But, many state courts that handle criminal
   cases have separate divisions or judges assigned to handle certain
   types of crimes such as a drug court, sometimes also known as a
   "problem-solving court".

   A few states like California have unified all courts of general and
   inferior jurisdiction to make the judicial process more
   efficient.^[citation needed] In such judicial systems, there are still
   departments of limited jurisdiction within the trial courts, and often
   these departments occupy exactly the same facilities they once occupied
   as independent courts of limited jurisdiction.^[citation needed]
   However, as mere administrative divisions, departments can be
   rearranged at the discretion of each trial court's presiding judge in
   response to changing caseloads.^[citation needed]

State court judges[edit]

   Unlike federal courts, where judges are presidential appointees
   confirmed by the U.S. Senate serving life terms of office, the vast
   majority of states have some judges who are elected, and the methods of
   appointment for appointed judges vary widely. State court judges are
   usually distinguished attorneys who have had some political
   involvement, who are pursuing second careers on the bench. But a small
   number of state court judges, particularly in limited jurisdiction
   trial courts, are non-lawyers, who are often elected to their posts.

   A disproportionate share of state court judges previously served as
   prosecutors, or less commonly as criminal defense attorneys or trial
   lawyers, although no particular background as an attorney is required
   to serve as a judge. The judiciary is not a separate profession in the
   American legal system as it is in many civil law jurisdictions.

   State court judges are typically paid less, have smaller staffs, and
   handle larger caseloads than their counterparts in the federal
   judiciary.

Differences among the states[edit]

     * Delaware, Mississippi, New Jersey, and Tennessee make a distinction
       between a "court of law" and a "court of equity" (chancery court).
       For the most part in the American legal system, while the
       distinction between law and equity still has some legal
       consequences, separate court systems are not maintained at the
       federal level or in other states.

     * Texas and Oklahoma have separate courts of last resort for criminal
       cases and other cases. In all other states, there is a single court
       of last resort. While collateral attacks on criminal convictions,
       such as state level habeas corpus petitions, are usually considered
       to be technically civil cases, because they are not brought by a
       prosecutor and do not seek to convict someone of a crime, these
       suits are, in both states, appealed to the criminal court of last
       resort, rather than the civil court of last resort.

     * In Maryland and New York, the Court of Appeals is the highest state
       court, and in New York the Supreme Court, Civil Court, and Criminal
       Court collectively are lower.

     * The courts of Louisiana and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are
       organized under a civil law model with significantly different
       procedures from those of the courts in all other states and the
       District of Columbia, which are organized on an American version of
       the common law system established originally in England. The court
       process used in these jurisdictions differs considerably from that
       used in the federal courts and the courts of other states in
       non-criminal cases. However, the U.S. Constitution requires these
       jurisdictions to use procedures similar to those of other U.S.
       jurisdictions in criminal cases.

     * The courts of one state are generally not required to follow the
       decisions of the courts of another state, but in the common law
       legal system it is customary for the courts of one state to look to
       decisions of other states as persuasive statements of what the law
       should be in the state making the decision, where express statutory
       provisions or prior precedent in that state do not control.

     * Many states lack an intermediate appellate court. In those states,
       litigants in general jurisdiction courts usually have the right to
       appeal their cases directly to the state supreme court. However,
       the U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly ruled that appeal is not a
       federal constitutional right, meaning that states are not obligated
       to provide it. In three states, New Hampshire, Virginia, and West
       Virginia, one can only petition the state supreme court for a first
       appeal, and the state supreme court can reject the petition and
       never decide the appeal on the merits. Many states have rules that
       permit certain cases such as death penalty cases and election cases
       to be appealed directly to the state supreme court, even though
       most civil cases must be appealed first to an intermediate
       appellate court.

     * In Utah, civil cases are appealed directly to the state supreme
       court, which then has the power to refer the case instead to an
       intermediate appellate court, rather than being appealed first to
       an intermediate appellate court and then to a state supreme court.

Nature of matters handled in state courts[edit]

Civil cases[edit]

   The vast majority of non-criminal cases in the United States are
   handled in state courts, rather than federal courts. For example, in
   Colorado, roughly 97% of all civil cases were filed in state courts and
   89% of the civil cases filed in federal court were bankruptcies in
   2002, a typical year. Just 0.3% of the non-bankruptcy civil cases in
   the state were filed in federal court.

   A large share of all civil cases filed in state courts are debt
   collection cases. For example, in Colorado in 2002, about 87% of all
   civil cases filed in the courts of inferior jurisdiction were debt
   collection and eviction cases, while in the court of general
   jurisdiction, about 60% of all civil cases (other than domestic
   relations and probate cases) were debt collection, foreclosure, and tax
   collection cases. A large share of the balance of civil cases in courts
   of limited jurisdiction involve temporary restraining orders, typically
   in non-marital domestic relations contexts, and name change petitions
   (generally for marriage, divorce or child custody reasons). A large
   share of the balance of civil cases in courts of general jurisdiction
   involve divorces, child custody disputes, child abuse cases,
   uncontested probate administrations, and personal injury cases that do
   not involve workplace injuries (which are usually handled through a
   non-judicial workers compensation process).

   Many state court civil cases produce quick default judgments or
   pretrial settlements, but even considering only cases that actually go
   to trial, state courts are the dominant forum for civil cases. In
   Colorado, in 2002, there were 79 civil trials in federal court (41 jury
   and 38 non-jury), and 5950 civil trials in state court (300 jury and
   5650 non-jury).[1][2] Essentially all probate and divorce cases are
   also brought in state court, even if the parties involved live in
   different states. In practice, almost all real property evictions and
   foreclosures are handled in state court.

   State courts systems always contain some courts of "general
   jurisdiction". All disputes which are capable of being brought in
   courts, arising under either state or federal law may be brought in one
   of the state courts, except in a few narrow case where federal law
   specifically limits jurisdiction exclusively to the federal courts.
   Some of the most notable cases exclusively in federal jurisdiction are
   suits between state governments, suits involving ambassadors, certain
   intellectual property cases, federal criminal cases, bankruptcy cases,
   large interstate class action cases, and most securities fraud class
   actions. There are also a handful of federal laws under which lawsuits
   can be pursued only in state court, such as those arising under the
   federal "junk fax" law.^[1] There have been times in U.S. history where
   almost all small claims, even if they arose under federal law, were
   required to be brought in state courts.

   State court systems usually have expedited procedures for civil
   disputes involving small dollar amounts (typically under $5,000 to
   $25,000 depending upon the state court in question), most of which
   involve collection of small contractual debts (such as unpaid credit
   cards) and landlord-tenant matters. Many states have small claims
   divisions where all parties proceed in civil cases without lawyers,
   often before a magistrate or justice of the peace. Federal courts do
   not have parallel small claims procedures and apply the same civil
   rules to all civil cases, which makes federal court an expensive venue
   for a private party to pursue a claim for a small dollar amount.

   Unlike state courts, federal courts are courts of "limited
   jurisdiction", that can only hear the types of cases specified in the
   Constitution and federal statutes (primarily federal crimes, cases
   arising under federal law, cases with a United States government party,
   and cases involving a diversity of citizenship between the parties).

   Often, a plaintiff can bring a matter either to state court or to
   federal court, because it arises under federal law, or involves a
   substantial monetary dispute (in excess of $75,000 as of October 26,
   2007) arising under state law between parties that do not reside in the
   same state. If a plaintiff files suit in state court in such a case,
   the defendant can remove the case to federal court.

   There is no federal constitutional right to a trial by jury in a state
   civil case under the Seventh Amendment to the United States
   Constitution, and not all states preserve a right to a civil jury in
   either their state constitution or state statutes. In practice,
   however, civil jury trials are available, generally on a similar basis
   to their availability in federal court, in every state except
   Louisiana. In these states, there is a general right to a jury trial in
   cases that would arise at law in colonial England, which generally
   includes most cases seeking simple money damages and no other relief.
   In practice, about three-quarters of all civil jury trials involved
   personal injury cases, and most of the rest involve breaches of
   contracts. In states where a state constitution provides for a right to
   a jury trial, or a right to open courts, this has sometimes been
   interpreted to confer not only a procedural right to a certain type of
   trial, but also a substantive right to have redress through the courts
   for the kinds of injuries that were compensable at common law.

   Prior to trial, most proceedings in non-criminal courts are conducted
   via papers filed in the court, often through lawyers. In limited
   jurisdiction courts, it is not uncommon for an initial appearance to be
   made in person at which a settlement is often reached. In general
   jurisdiction state courts, it is not uncommon for all pre-trial matters
   to be conducted outside the court, with attorneys negotiating
   scheduling matters, pre-trial examinations of witnesses taking place in
   lawyer's office through depositions, and a settlement conference
   conducted by a private mediator at the mediator's office.

Criminal cases[edit]

   About 91% of people in prison at any given time in the United States
   were convicted in state court for violating state criminal laws, rather
   than in federal court for violating federal criminal laws, including
   99% of defendants sentenced to death.[3]

   The proportion of criminal cases brought in state court rather than
   federal court is higher than 91% because misdemeanor and petty offense
   prosecutions are disporportionately brought in state courts and most
   criminal prosecutions involve misdemeanors and petty offenses. The
   number of trials conducted in each system is another way to illustrate
   the relative size of the two criminal justice systems. In Colorado, in
   2002, there were approximately 40 criminal trials in federal court, and
   there were 1,898 criminal trials (excluding hundreds of quasi-criminal
   trials in juvenile cases, municipal cases and infraction cases) in
   state courts, so only about 2% of criminal trials took place in federal
   court. Most jury trials in the United States take place in criminal
   cases in state courts.

   State courts do not have jurisdiction over criminal cases arising on
   Indian reservations even if those reservations are located in their
   state. Less serious crimes on Indian reservations are prosecuted in
   tribal courts. A large share of violent crimes that are prosecuted in
   federal court arise on Indian reservations or federal property, where
   state courts lack jurisdiction, since tribal court jurisdiction is
   usually limited to less serious offenses. Federal crimes on federal
   property in a state are often defined with reference to state criminal
   law.

   Federal courts disproportionately handle white-collar crimes,
   immigration-related crimes and drug offenses (these crimes make up
   about 70% of the federal docket, but just 19% of the state court
   criminal docket). [4][5] Federal courts have the power to bring death
   penalty charges under federal law, even if they arise in states where
   there is no death penalty under state law, but the federal government
   rarely utilizes this right.

   Many rights of criminal defendants in state courts arise under federal
   law, but federal courts only examine if the state courts applied those
   federal rights correctly on a direct appeal from the conviction to the
   U.S. Supreme Court, after state court direct appeals have been
   exhausted, or in a collateral attack on a conviction in a habeas corpus
   proceeding after all state court remedies (usually including a state
   court habeas corpus proceeding) have been exhausted. Some rights of
   criminal defendants that apply in federal court do not exist in state
   court. For example, in many states there is no constitutional right to
   be indicted by a grand jury before facing a criminal prosecution for a
   felony or infamous misdemeanor. Two states (Louisiana and Oregon) do
   not require unanimous juries in non-capital criminal cases.

   Unlike non-criminal cases, criminal proceedings in state courts are
   primarily conducted orally, in person, in open court.

Administration[edit]

   In most, but not all states (California and New York are significant
   exceptions), the state supreme court or a related administrative body
   has the power to write the rules of procedure that govern the courts
   through a rule-making process. In a minority of the states, criminal
   and civil procedure are largely governed by state statutes.

   Most states model their general jurisdiction trial court rules closely
   upon the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure with modifications to address
   types of cases that come up only in state practice (like traffic
   violations), and model their professional ethics rules closely upon
   models drafted by the American Bar Association with minor
   modifications. A minority of states, however, have idiosyncratic
   procedural rules, often based on the Field Code in place in many states
   before the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were adopted. Importantly,
   neither California nor New York state follow federal models.

   Typically, state trial courts of limited jurisdiction have generally
   similar rules to state trial courts of general jurisdiction, but are
   stripped of rules applicable to special cases like class actions and
   many pretrial procedures (such as out-of-court discovery in the absence
   of a court order).

   Most state supreme courts also have general supervisory authority over
   the state court system. In this capacity they are responsible, for
   example, for making budget requests and administrative management
   decisions for the court system as a whole. In most states, such
   administrative authority has been transferred or delegated to a state
   judicial council which includes members of lower courts.

State court regulation of lawyers[edit]

   All state supreme courts are the de jure primary regulatory body for
   all lawyers in their state and determine who can practice law and when
   lawyers are sanctioned for violations of professional ethical rules,
   which are generally also put in place as state court rules. In all
   states, such powers have been delegated either to the state bar
   association or various committees, commissions, or offices directly
   responsible to the state supreme court. The result is that such
   subordinate entities generally have original jurisdiction over lawyer
   admissions and discipline, nearly all de facto lawyer regulation takes
   place through such entities, and the state supreme court becomes
   directly involved only when petitioned to not ratify the decisions made
   by some subordinate entity in its name.

Relationship to federal courts[edit]

   The relationship between state courts and federal courts is very
   complicated. Although the United States Constitution and federal laws
   override state laws where there is a conflict between federal and state
   law, state courts are not subordinate to federal courts. Rather, as
   instruments of separate sovereigns (under the U.S. system of dual
   sovereignty), they are two parallel sets of courts with different but
   often overlapping jurisdiction.

   The U.S. Supreme Court can but is not required to review final
   decisions of state courts, after a party exhausts all remedies up to a
   request for relief from the state's highest appellate court, if the
   Court believes that the case involves an important question of federal
   law. The U.S. Supreme Court never reviews decisions of state courts
   that depend entirely on the resolution of a state law issue; there must
   be an issue of federal law (such as the federal constitutional right to
   due process) implicit in the state case before the Court will even
   agree to hear it. Since there really is no such issue in the vast
   majority of state cases, the decision of the state supreme court in
   such cases is effectively final, as any petition for certiorari to the
   U.S. Supreme Court will be summarily denied without comment.

Nomenclature[edit]

   The following table notes the names of the courts in the states and
   territories of the United States. Listed are the principal courts of
   first instance (general jurisdiction), the principal intermediate
   appellate courts, and the courts of final appeal or resort.

   In some cases where courts are generally assigned to counties, the
   number of county-based courts does not exactly match the number of
   actual counties in the state. This happens when a single court has
   jurisdiction over more than one county.
   State Court of first instance (general jurisdiction trial courts)
   Intermediate appellate court Court of last resort
   (State supreme court)
   Alabama Circuit Court (41 judicial districts) Court of Civil Appeals
   Court of Criminal Appeals
   (-1969: single Court of Appeals) Supreme Court
   Alaska Superior Court (four districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Arizona Superior Court (15 counties) Court of Appeals (two divisions)
   Supreme Court
   Arkansas Circuit Court (23 judicial circuits) Court of Appeals Supreme
   Court
   California Superior Court (58 counties) Courts of Appeal (six appellate
   districts) Supreme Court
   Colorado District Court (22 judicial districts) Court of Appeals
   Supreme Court
   Connecticut Superior Court (13 judicial districts) Appellate Court
   Supreme Court
   (previously: Supreme Court of Errors)
   Delaware Superior Court
   (previously: Superior Court and Orphans' Court)
   Court of Chancery (none) Supreme Court
   (previously: Court of Errors and Appeals)
   District of Columbia Superior Court (none) Court of Appeals
   (previously: Municipal Court of Appeals)
   Florida Circuit Court (20 judicial circuits) District Court of Appeal
   (5 districts) Supreme Court
   Georgia Superior Court (49 judicial circuits) Court of Appeals Supreme
   Court
   Hawaii Circuit Court (four circuits) Intermediate Court of Appeals
   Supreme Court
   Idaho District Court (7 judicial districts) Court of Appeals Supreme
   Court
   Illinois Circuit Court (23 judicial circuits) Appellate Court
   (5 districts) Supreme Court
   Indiana Circuit Court (90 circuits) (District) Court of Appeals
   (5 districts)
   (previously: Appellate Court) Supreme Court
   Iowa District Court
   (8 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Kansas District Court (31 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Kentucky Circuit Court (57 circuits) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   (-1976: Court of Appeals)
   Louisiana District Court
   (40 districts) (Circuit) Courts of Appeal
   (5 circuits) Supreme Court
   (-1813: Superior Court)
   Maine Superior Court (none) Supreme Judicial Court
   Maryland Circuit Court
   (8 judicial circuits) Court of Special Appeals Court of Appeals
   Massachusetts Superior Court
   (14 divisions) Appeals Court Supreme Judicial Court
   Michigan Circuit Court (57 circuits) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Minnesota District Court (10 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Mississippi Circuit Court (22 districts)
   Chancery Court (20 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Missouri Circuit Court
   (45 circuits) (District) Court of Appeals
   (3 districts) Supreme Court
   Montana District Court
   (22 judicial districts) (none) Supreme Court
   Nebraska District Court
   (12 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Nevada District Court
   (10^[2] districts) (none) Supreme Court
   New Hampshire Superior Court (none) Supreme Court
   New Jersey (Vicinage) Superior Court
   (15 vicinages), has separate law & equity divisions Superior Court,
   Appellate Division
   (previously: Court of Chancery,
   Supreme Court,
   and Prerogative Court) Supreme Court
   (previously: Court of Errors and Appeals)
   New Mexico District Court
   (13 judicial districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   New York (District) Supreme Court
   (12 judicial districts)
   County Court
   (57 counties) Supreme Court, Appellate Term
   (3 judicial departments)
   Supreme Court, Appellate Division
   (4 departments) Court of Appeals
   (-1848: Court for the correction of Errors,
   Supreme Court of Judicature,
   and Court of Chancery)
   North Carolina Superior Court (46 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme
   Court
   North Dakota District Court
   (7 judicial districts) (none) Supreme Court
   Ohio (County) Court of Common Pleas
   (88 counties) (District) Court of Appeals
   (12 districts) Supreme Court
   Oklahoma District Court
   (26 judicial districts with 77 district courts) Court of Civil Appeals
   Supreme Court
   Court of Criminal Appeals
   (1907-1959: Criminal Court of Appeals)
   Oregon (District) Circuit Court
   (36 courts administratively divided between 27 judicial districts)
   Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Pennsylvania County Court of Common Pleas
   (60 judicial districts) Superior Court
   Commonwealth Court Supreme Court
   Rhode Island Superior Court (none) Supreme Court
   South Carolina Circuit Court
   (16 circuits) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   South Dakota Circuit Court
   (7 circuits) (none) Supreme Court
   Tennessee (District) Circuit Court
   (31 judicial districts)
   (District) Criminal Court
   (31 judicial districts)
   (District) Chancery Court
   (31 judicial districts) (Grand Division) Court of Appeals
   (3 grand divisions)
   (Grand Division) Court of Criminal Appeals
   (3 grand divisions) Supreme Court
   Texas District Court
   (420 districts) (District) Court of Appeals
   (14 districts) Supreme Court (civil cases);
   Court of Criminal Appeals
   Utah District Court
   (8 districts) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   Vermont Superior Court
   District Court
   Family Court (none) Supreme Court
   Virginia Circuit Court (120 courts divided among 31 judicial circuits)
   Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   (previously: Supreme Court of Appeals)
   Washington (County) Superior Court (39 counties) (Division) Court of
   Appeals
   (3 divisions) Supreme Court
   West Virginia Circuit Court
   (31 judicial circuits) (none) Supreme Court of Appeals
   Wisconsin (District) Circuit Court
   (10 judicial administrative districts) (District) Court of Appeals
   (4 districts) Supreme Court
   Wyoming District Court (nine districts) (none) Supreme Court
   American Samoa High Court, Trial Division (none) High Court, Appellate
   Division
   Guam Superior Court (none) Supreme Court
   Northern Mariana Islands Superior Court (none) Supreme Court
   Puerto Rico Court of First Instance
   Superior Division (13)
   Municipal Division (13) Court of Appeals Supreme Court
   U.S. Virgin Islands Superior Court (two divisions) (none) Supreme Court

See also[edit]

     * Courts of the United States

References[edit]

    1. ^ See Telephone Consumer Protection Act (Act), 47 U.S.C.S. § 227
       (the "junk fax" law); Consumer Crusade, Inc. v. Affordable Health
       Care Solutions, Inc., 121 P.3d 350 (Colo. App. 2005)
    2. ^
       http://supreme.nvcourts.gov/Supreme/Court_Information/About_the_Nev
       ada_Judiciary/

External links and references[edit]

     * 2004 United States Justice Department Report
     * National Center for State Courts, including State Court Structure
       Charts
     * Gavel2Gavel's State Court web directory, an ad-supported website
     * Federal Court Statistics 2002
     * Census of State Court Organization Bureau of Justice Statistics
     * Colorado Court Statistics 2002
     * Statistical Abstract of the United States


                             * v
     * t
     * e

   Law of the United States
   Constitutional law
                        * Federalism
                        * Separation of powers
                        * Civil rights

                                                           Scales of justice
     Courts of the
   United States

                      Federal courts
                                      * Supreme (SCOTUS)
                                      * Appeals
                                      * District (list)
                                      * Bankruptcy
                                      * Claims
                                      * International Trade
                                      * Tax

                       State courts
                                      * State supreme

       Education
                        * Law school
                        * Law School Admission Test
                        * Admission to the bar

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_court_(United_States)&
   oldid=610255267"
   Categories:
     * State court systems of the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * 日本語
     * Simple English
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 26 May 2014 at 20:34.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
