   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Television in the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain
   unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to
   improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October
   2012)
   Part of a series on the
       Culture of the United States
   Flag of the United States.svg
                 History
                  People
                Languages
   Mythology and folklore
     * Mythology
     * Folklore

                 Cuisine
                Festivals
                 Religion
   Art
     * Architecture
     * Sculpture
     * Fashion

   Literature
     * Comic books
     * Poetry

   Music and performing arts
     * Music

   Media
     * Radio
     * Television
     * Cinema

                  Sport
   Monuments
     * World Heritage Sites

   Symbols
     * Flag
     * Coat of arms

     * Portal icon United States portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Television is a major mass media of the United States. Household
   ownership of television sets in the country is 96.7%,^[1] and the
   majority of households have more than one set. The peak ownership
   percentage of households with at least one television set occurred
   during the 1996-97 season, with 98.4% ownership.^[2] As a whole, the
   television networks of the United States are the largest and most
   syndicated in the world.^[3]

   As of August 2013, approximately 114,200,000 American households own at
   least one television set.^[4]

   Due to a recent surge in the number and popularity of critically
   acclaimed television series, many critics have said that American
   television is currently enjoying a golden age.^[5]^[6]

Contents

     * 1 Television channels and networks
          + 1.1 Broadcast television
               o 1.1.1 Major broadcast networks
               o 1.1.2 Other over-the-air commercial television
               o 1.1.3 Broadcast television in languages other than
                 English
               o 1.1.4 Non-commercial television
          + 1.2 Cable and satellite television
          + 1.3 Internet services
     * 2 The business of television
     * 3 Programming
          + 3.1 The life cycle of U.S. television shows
     * 4 Regulation
     * 5 History of American television
     * 6 See also
     * 7 References
     * 8 External links

Television channels and networks[edit]

   In the United States, television is available via broadcast
   ("over-the-air"), unencrypted satellite ("free-to-air"), direct
   broadcast satellite, cable television, and IPTV (internet protocol
   television). There are also competing video services on the World Wide
   Web.

   Over-the-air and free-to-air television do not necessitate any monthly
   payments, while cable, direct broadcast satellite, and IPTV services
   require monthly payments that vary depending on the number of channels
   that a subscriber chooses to pay for in a particular package. Channels
   are usually sold in groups, rather than singularly.

Broadcast television[edit]

   Main article: Terrestrial television

   The United States has a decentralized, market-oriented television
   system. The nation has a national public television service known as
   the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). Local media markets have their
   own television stations, which may be affiliated with or owned and
   operated by a television network. Stations may sign affiliation
   agreements with one of the national networks that can last anywhere
   from one to ten years (although such agreements often last on average
   between four and six years). Except in very small markets with few
   stations, affiliation agreements are usually exclusive: if a station is
   an NBC affiliate, the station would not air programs from ABC, CBS, or
   other networks. Arrangements in which television stations carried more
   than one network on its main signal were more common between the 1940s
   and the 1960s, although some arrangements continued as late as 2010;
   today, programming from networks other than that which the station has
   a primary affiliation are usually carried over digital subchannels.

   However, to ensure local presences in television broadcasting, federal
   law restricts the amount of network programming that local stations can
   run. Until the 1970s and 1980s, local stations supplemented network
   programming with a sizeable amount of their own locally produced shows.
   Today however, many stations produce only local news programs, while
   filling the rest of their schedule with syndicated programs, or
   material produced independently and sold to individual stations in each
   local market.

Major broadcast networks[edit]

   See also: Big Three television networks, Fourth television network and
   Dayparting

   The five major U.S. broadcast television networks are NBC, CBS, ABC,
   Fox, and The CW. The first three began as radio networks: NBC and CBS
   in the 1920s, and ABC having spun off from NBC in 1943 as the Blue
   Network. Fox is a relative newcomer that began in October 1986,
   although it is built upon the remnants of the former DuMont Television
   Network, which was an earlier attempt at a "fourth network" that
   operated from 1948 to 1956. The CW was created in 2006 when UPN merged
   with the broadcast and cable assets of The WB (The WB's online assets
   remained separate, although its former web domain – which was revamped
   as a streaming service – was shut down in 2013 and replaced with a
   promotional website for Warner Bros. Television programs). All in all,
   the U.S. broadcasting landscape dramatically evolved towards a
   conglomeratization of players – an effect also called concentration of
   media ownership, which describes the narrowing of competition in modern
   television broadcasting.

   Weekday schedules on ABC, CBS, and NBC affiliates tend to be similar,
   with programming choices sorted by dayparts (Fox does not air network
   programming outside of prime time other than sports programming that
   airs on weekends and, on fairly rare occasions, weekdays). Typically,
   these begin with an early-morning local news program, followed by a
   network morning program, such as NBC's Today, which mixes news,
   weather, interviews, and music.

   Network daytime schedules consist of talk shows and soap operas,
   although one network – CBS – still carries game shows (a handful of
   other game shows otherwise air in syndication); local newscasts may air
   at midday timeslots. Syndicated talk shows are shown in the late
   afternoon, followed by additional local newscasts in the early evening
   time period. ABC, CBS, and NBC offer network news programs each
   evening, generally airing at 6:30 or 7:00 p.m. in the Eastern Time Zone
   and 5:30 or 6:00 p.m. in other areas. Local newscasts or syndicated
   programs fill the "prime access" hour or half-hour, and lead into the
   networks' prime time schedules, which are the day's most-watched three
   hours of television.

   Typically, family-oriented comedy programs led in the early part of
   prime time, although in recent years, reality television programs such
   as Dancing with the Stars and more adult-oriented scripted programs
   have largely replaced them. Later in the evening, dramas such as CSI:
   Crime Scene Investigation, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, and
   Grey's Anatomy air. Sunday is the most-watched night of American
   television, with many of TV's most popular shows airing that night.^[7]
   Viewership tends to then decline throughout the week, culminating in
   the lowest ratings on Friday and Saturday night. Networks, however, pay
   special attention to Thursday night, which is the last night for
   advertisers of weekend purchases such as cars and movies to reach large
   TV audiences. Before the reemergence of Sunday as the top night of
   programming, Thursday was the most lucrative.^[8] Throughout the 1990s,
   NBC called Thursday night television "Must See TV."

   At the end of prime time, another local news program is broadcast,
   usually followed by late-night interview shows, such as Late Show with
   David Letterman or The Tonight Show. Rather than sign off for the early
   hours of the morning (as was standard practice until the early 1970s in
   larger markets and until the mid-1980s in smaller ones), television
   stations now fill the time with syndicated programming, reruns of prime
   time television shows or late local newscasts, or 30-minute
   advertisements, known as infomercials, and in the case of CBS and ABC,
   overnight network news programs. On some stations, syndicated
   programming may fill timeslots where local newscasts do not air, either
   due to the station not programming news in certain time periods or not
   having a news department; similarly, local news programs in the late
   evening hours may air during the final hour of primetime (10:00 p.m. in
   the Eastern and Pacific Time Zones and 9:00 p.m. in all others),
   usually on stations affiliated with networks other than those
   classified as part of the "Big Three" (ABC, NBC, and CBS).

   Saturday mornings usually feature network programming aimed at children
   (including animated cartoons), while Sunday mornings include public
   affairs programs. Both of these help fulfill stations' legal
   obligations, respectively to provide educational children's programs
   and public service programming. Sports and infomercials (and on some
   stations, syndicated feature film packages) can be found on weekend
   afternoons, followed again by the same type of prime-time shows aired
   during the week.

Other over-the-air commercial television[edit]

   This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (February 2014)

   From 1955 until 1986, all English-language stations not affiliated with
   the big three networks were independent, airing only locally produced
   and syndicated programming. Many independent stations still exist in
   the U.S., usually historically broadcasting on the UHF band. Syndicated
   shows, often reruns of television series currently in or out of
   production and movies released as recently as three years prior to
   their initial syndication broadcast, take up much of their schedules.

   However in 1986, the Fox Broadcasting Company launched a challenge to
   the Big Three networks. Thanks largely to the success of shows like The
   Simpsons, as well as the network's 1993 acquisition of rights to show
   National Football League games,^[9] Fox has established itself as a
   major player in broadcast television. However, Fox differs from the
   three older networks in that it does not air daily morning and nightly
   news programs or have network-run daytime or weeknight late night
   schedules (though late night shows do air on Saturday nights). Its
   nightly prime-time schedule is only two hours long (three hours on
   Sundays), and some of its major market affiliates used to broadcast on
   UHF before the transition to digital. Many of its mid-size and small
   market affiliates outsource news production to Big Three affiliates
   rather produce their own newscasts, and its flagship stations in New
   York City and Los Angeles do not include the network's name within
   their callsigns (Fox's New York City and Los Angeles stations instead
   use the respective callsigns WNYW and KTTV).

   Fox's only scheduled news program is Fox News Sunday, which it airs on
   Sunday mornings; special news coverage on Fox comes from the staff of
   its sister cable network Fox News Channel, though not all affiliates
   carry breaking news bulletins from Fox News outside of primetime
   presidential addresses. Most of Fox's affiliates now have local
   newscasts, often scheduled in primetime usually airing an hour earlier
   to which they compete with network dramas, rather than other local
   newscasts, and in the morning for two additional hours that overlap
   with morning news programs on ABC, NBC, and CBS.

   Three new networks launched in the 1990s: The WB (which launched in
   January 1995), UPN (which also launched in January 1995), and Pax TV
   (which launched in August 1998, Pax later became i: Independent
   Television in July 2005 and then Ion Television in September 2007) --
   launched. The fledging WB and UPN merged into The CW in September
   2006,^[10]^[11] while News Corporation's MyNetworkTV, created to
   replace UPN programming on Fox's O&Os, debuted that same month, albeit
   two weeks earlier.^[12]^[13]

   Ion broadcasts 24 hours a day, seven days a week (though only fifteen
   hours of its schedule on Saturday through Thursdays and nineteen hours
   on Fridays consist of entertainment programming, with infomercials and
   religious programming making up the remainder of the schedule), making
   the Ion network the largest English-language commercial television
   network to be totally responsible for its affiliates' programming.

   The CW broadcasts ten hours a week of programming in prime time (all
   airing only on Monday through Fridays) and five hours on Saturday
   mornings (its children's program block may bleed into the afternoon
   hours on weekends on a few stations due to other locally scheduled
   programs). MyNetworkTV originally started as a conventional network,
   however after experiencing continued low ratings for its prime
   time-exclusive schedule, it converted into a "broadcast syndication
   service" in 2009, that broadcasts reruns of series originally aired on
   other networks for ten hours a week on Monday through Fridays.

Broadcast television in languages other than English[edit]

   Univision, a Spanish language broadcast network, is the fifth-largest
   television network behind NBC, CBS, ABC, and Fox ratings-wise. Its
   major competition is Telemundo, a sister network of NBC (which acquired
   Telemundo in 1999). Other popular Spanish-language over-the-air
   networks are Univision-owned UniMás, which is aimed at a younger
   Hispanic demographic; Azteca América, the American version of Mexico's
   Azteca; and independent network Estrella TV. Fox International
   Channels, a sister company to the English language Fox network,
   launched MundoFox in August 2012.

   French language programming is generally limited in scope, with some
   locally produced French and creole programming available in the Miami
   area (serving refugees from Haiti) and Louisiana, along with some
   locales along the heavily populated Eastern Seaboard. Francophone areas
   near the eastern portion of the Canada-United States border generally
   receive their television broadcasts from French Canadian channels,
   which are widely available over-the-air and on cable in those areas.

   Especially after the transition to digital television, many large
   cities have Asian-language broadcast stations, such as KYAZ in Houston.

   There have also been a few local stations in American Sign Language
   accompanied by closed captioned English. Prior to the development of
   closed captioning, it was not uncommon to see some public television
   broadcasts translated into ASL by an on-screen interpreter. An
   on-screen interpreter may still utilized for the deaf and
   hard-of-hearing community for emergency broadcasts, e.g. severe weather
   alerts given by local governments, accompanied by closed captioning.

Non-commercial television[edit]

   Public television has a far smaller role than in most other countries.
   The federal government does produce NASA TV (three channels featuring
   space program information and educational programs) and The Pentagon
   Channel (a military news outlet) for public consumption, but only
   distributes them via satellite and the Internet and not through
   terrestrial outlets. In addition, Broadcasting Board of Governors
   content (the most well-known being Voice of America) have been
   available to U.S. consumers since the partial repeal of the Smith–Mundt
   Act in 2013; VOA and its sister outlets are likewise restricted to
   shortwave and Internet broadcasts. However, a number of states – such
   as Wisconsin, Maryland, Minnesota, Oklahoma and South Carolina – have
   state-owned public broadcasting authorities that operate and fund all
   public television stations in their respective states. The Alabama
   Educational Television Commission, licensee for the nine stations
   comprising Alabama Public Television, was established by the Alabama
   Legislature in 1953. In January 1955, WCIQ on Mount Cheaha began
   operation as the nation's ninth non-commercial television station. Four
   months later, with the sign-on of WBIQ in Birmingham, Alabama became
   the first state in the nation with an educational television network.
   Alabama Public Television made its first broadcast as a network in
   April 1955.

   Alabama Public Television was a model for other states in the nation
   and for television broadcasters in other countries. 25 other states
   copied Alabama's system of operation to provide service through
   multiple, linked television stations. The federal government does
   subsidize non-commercial educational television stations through the
   Corporation for Public Broadcasting. The income received from the
   government is insufficient to cover expenses and stations rely on
   corporate sponsorships and viewer contributions.

   American public television stations air programming that commercial
   stations do not offer, such as educational, including cultural and
   arts, and public affairs programming. Most (but, by no means, all)
   public television stations are members of the Public Broadcasting
   Service, sharing programs such as Sesame Street and Masterpiece
   Theatre. Unlike the commercial networks, PBS does not officially
   produce any of its own programming; instead, individual PBS stations,
   station groups and affiliated producers create programming and provide
   these through PBS to other affiliates; there are also a number of
   syndicators dealing exclusively or primarily with public broadcast
   stations, both PBS and independent public television stations;
   additionally, there are a number of smaller networks feeding
   programming to public stations, including World, Create and MHz
   Worldview; the German public broadcaster Deutsche Welle has also
   provided blocks of programming to a variety of affiliates in the U.S.,
   and increasingly feeds from other national broadcasters have been
   playing through digital subchannels belonging to public stations in the
   U.S. New York City's municipally-owned broadcast service, NYCTV,
   creates original programming that airs in several markets. Few cities
   have major municipally-owned stations.

   Many religious broadcasting networks and stations exist, also surviving
   on viewer contributions and time leased to the programming producers,
   including Trinity Broadcasting Network, Three Angels Broadcasting
   Network, Hope Channel, Amazing Facts Television, Daystar Television
   Network, The Word Network, The Worship Network, Total Christian
   Television and INSP. These networks rely mainly on church services or
   other religious teaching series for programming, although they also
   incorporate faith-based children's programming and at least two such
   networks – TBN and Daystar – also air religious-themed feature-length
   films.

Cable and satellite television[edit]

   Main articles: Cable television in the United States and Satellite
   television in the United States

   While pay television systems existed as early as the late 1940s, until
   the early 1970s cable television only brought distant over-the-air
   television to rural areas without local stations. This role was
   reflected in the original meaning of the CATV acronym: community
   antenna TV. In that decade, national networks dedicated exclusively to
   cable broadcasting appeared along with cable systems in major cities
   with over-the-air television. By the mid-1970s some form of cable
   television was available in almost every market that already had
   over-the-air television service. Today, most American households
   receive cable television, and cable networks collectively have greater
   viewership than broadcast networks, even though individual programs on
   most of the major commercial broadcast networks often have relatively
   higher viewership than those seen on cable channels.

   Unlike broadcast networks, most cable networks air the same programming
   nationwide. Top cable networks include USA Network (which maintains a
   general entertainment format), ESPN and Fox Sports (which focus on
   sports programming), MTV (which focuses on music and reality television
   programming), CNN and Fox News Channel (which are dedicated news
   channels with some opinion and other feature-driven programming), Syfy
   (which focuses on science fiction), Disney Channel, Nickelodeon and
   Cartoon Network (which focus on children's programming, although the
   latter two run blocks aimed at an adult audience), Discovery Channel
   and Animal Planet (which focus on reality and documentary programs),
   TBS (a general entertainment network with a principal focus on comedy),
   TNT and FX (also general entertainment networks, with some focus on
   drama) and Lifetime (which is targets at a female audience).

   The national cable television network became possible in the mid-1970s
   with the launch of domestic communication satellites that could
   economically broadcast television programs to cable operators anywhere
   in the continental United States (some domestic satellites also covered
   Alaska and Hawaii with dedicated spot beams). Until then, cable
   networks like HBO had been limited to regional coverage through
   distribution over expensive terrestrial microwave links leased from the
   telephone companies (primarily AT&T). Satellites were generally used
   only for international (i.e., transoceanic) communications; their
   antennas covered an entire hemisphere, producing weak signals that
   required large, expensive receiving antennas. The first domestic
   communications satellite, Westar 1, was launched in 1974. By
   concentrating its signal on the continental United States with a
   directional antenna, Westar 1 could transmit to TVRO ("television
   receive-only") dishes only a few meters in diameter, well within the
   means of local cable television operators.
   Satellite TV receiver dishes.

   Cable system operators now receive programming by satellite,
   terrestrial optical fiber, off the air, and from in-house sources and
   relay it to subscribers' homes. Usually, local governments award a
   monopoly to provide cable television service in a given area. By law,
   cable systems must include local broadcast stations in their offerings
   to customers.

   Enterprising individuals soon found they could install their own
   satellite dishes and eavesdrop on the feeds to the cable operators. The
   signals were transmitted as unscrambled analog FM that did not require
   advanced or expensive technology. Since these same satellites were also
   used internally by the television networks, they could also watch
   programs not intended for public broadcast such as affiliate feeds
   without commercials and/or intended for another time zone; raw footage
   from remote news teams; advance transmissions of upcoming programs; and
   live news and talk shows during breaks when those on camera might not
   realize that anyone outside the network could hear them.

   Encrypting was introduced to prevent people from receiving pay content
   for free, and nearly every pay channel was encrypted by the mid-to-late
   1980s (this did not happen without protest, such as an incident in
   which a satellite dealer intecepted HBO's signal during a film telecast
   in 1986). Satellite television also began a digital transition, well
   before over the air broadcasting did the same, to increase satellite
   capacity and/or reduce the size of the receiving antennas, and this
   also made it more difficult for individuals to intercept these signals.

   Eventually, the industry began to cater to individuals who wanted to
   continue to receive satellite television (and were willing to pay for
   it) in two ways: by authorizing the descrambling of the original
   satellite feeds to the cable television operators and with new direct
   broadcast satellite television services using their own satellites.
   These latter services, which began in the mid-1990s, offer programming
   similar to cable television. DirecTV and Dish Network are the major DBS
   providers in the country, with 20 and 14 million customers respectively
   as of February 2014.^[14] Meanwhile, the major cable television
   providers are Comcast with 22 million customers, Time Warner Cable with
   11 million, and Cox Communications, Charter Communications, AT&T
   U-Verse and Verizon FiOS with five to six million each.

   Although most networks make viewers pay a fee to receive their
   programming, some networks broadcast using unencrypted feeds. After
   broadcast television switched to a digital infrastructure, new channels
   became available on unencrypted satellites to bring more free
   television to Americans; some of these are available as a digital
   subchannel to local broadcasters, this reason may be for the expensive
   costs of the DVB-S equipment. NASA TV, Pentagon Channel, Antenna TV,
   This TV, TheCoolTV and Retro Television Network (through its
   affiliates) are examples, international news channels like NHK World,
   France 24, i24news and Al Jazeera English until the launch of Al
   Jazeera America are commonly watched this way as a result to the lack
   of availability on cable, DBS and IPTV.

   Some cable providers use interactive features in their set-top boxes to
   distribute video on demand within their internal networks.

Internet services[edit]

   IPTV is similar to a cable subscription, but instead of the set-top box
   receiving information via a dedicated wire, video is transmitted over
   the public Internet or private internet protocol-based network to a
   set-top box.

   Over-the-top content bypasses multiple system operators entirely, and
   allows viewing of programs hosted by independent providers. Internet
   television began in the 1990s and has become popular in the 2000s
   onward, resulting in a trend of cord cutting – the canceling of cable
   subscriptions in favor of online content, over-the-air broadcasts, and
   DVD rentals. Web television providers in the United States include
   Hulu, Netflix (which was originally structured as a mail-order DVD
   rental service), MyTV, and many international websites such as YouTube,
   Myspace, Newgrounds, Blip and Crackle. Viewers can watch these programs
   from any web browser, whether on a desktop computer, laptop, tablet or
   smartphone. Mobile television services also include mobile apps for
   both traditional and new programming providers, usually optimized for a
   small screen and mobile bandwidth constraints. Mobile video is
   available for direct download or streaming (usually for a one-time
   download fee) from the iTunes Store, Google Play and Amazon Instant
   Video.

   Internet-connected video game consoles and dedicated Smart TV boxes are
   available that connect televisions to online video services. These
   services are marketed as more convenient for consumers who would
   otherwise have trouble connecting a computer to a full-size television
   and using a web browser to view content. Some televisions have built-in
   capabilities; dedicated boxes include Google TV, Apple TV, Roku,
   Netgear Digital Entertainer, Amkette EvoTV and formerly the Nexus Q.
   Devices that require a PC and television include Windows Media Center
   Extender, HP MediaSmart Connect, Boxee and Hauppauge MediaMVP.

   The company Aereo provides a cloud-based digital video recorder service
   for over-the-air broadcasts; although it and the similarly structured
   FilmOn have run into legal problems with broadcasters who accuse the
   services of transmitting programs from broadcast television stations in
   violation of copyrights (Aereo and FilmOn both state that their use of
   "miniature" antennas for transmission of programs to individual users
   is legal, although they have experienced mixed decisions declaring them
   either legal or in infringement of copyrights).

The business of television[edit]

   File:FrazierCap.theora.ogv Play media
   The main characters in Frasier selling U.S. Treasury Bonds.

   Over-the-air commercial stations and networks generate the vast
   majority of their revenue from advertisements. According to a 2001
   survey, broadcast stations allocated 16 to 21 minutes per hour to
   commercials. Most cable networks also generate income from
   advertisements, although most basic cable networks also receive
   subscription fees. However, premium cable networks, such as HBO, do not
   air commercials. Instead, cable television subscribers must pay extra
   to receive the pay television services.

   Networks traditionally allocate a portion of commercial time during
   their shows to the local affiliates, which allow the local stations to
   generate revenue. In the same manner, cable television providers
   generate some of their revenue by selling local commercial time for
   each cable network being broadcast. The other main source of revenue
   for the cable operators are subscription fees.

   Cable companies are required by the 1992 Cable Television Consumer
   Protection and Competition Act to negotiate for retransmission consent,
   usually paying broadcasters for the right to carry their signals; this
   method has resulted in problems between pay television providers and
   companies that own subscription television services, as disagreements
   sometimes arise leading to carriage disputes that result in broadcast
   stations or cable channels being pulled for a protracted period of
   time, often due to carriage fee increases that a provider may consider
   to be too expensive (since retransmission consent fees are a form of
   subscriber fee, any increase in fees that a provider carries will be
   passed on to the subscriber, which providers are hesitant to do out of
   concern that it may result in subscriber defections due to the
   increased rates of program packages).

Programming[edit]

   American television has had very successful programs that have inspired
   television networks across the world to develop shows of similar types
   or to syndicate these shows to other countries. Some of these shows are
   still on the air and some have maintained decent runs in syndication.
   The opposite is also true; a number of popular American programs were
   based on shows from other countries, especially the United Kingdom and
   Canada.

   The major networks all offer a morning news program, with CBS's CBS
   This Morning, NBC's Today and ABC's Good Morning America as standard
   bearers, as well as an early-evening newscast anchored by the de facto
   face of the network's news division like Walter Cronkite and Dan Rather
   for CBS; Chet Huntley, David Brinkley and Tom Brokaw for NBC; and Peter
   Jennings for ABC. Successful news magazines have included 60 Minutes,
   20/20 and Dateline NBC in primetime, and Meet the Press, Face the
   Nation and This Week on Sunday mornings.
   On Wheel of Fortune, three people compete against each other to win
   cash and physical prizes such as overseas trips.

   Daytime television has been home of many popular game shows over the
   years, particularly during the 1970s, such as The Price is Right,
   Family Feud, Match Game, The Newlywed Game and Concentration. Wheel of
   Fortune and Jeopardy! have found their greatest success in the
   early-evening slot preceding primetime. However, game shows that also
   aired within primetime had great popularity in the 1950s and 1960s such
   as What's My Line?, I've Got a Secret and To Tell the Truth; and again,
   intermittently, in the 2000s with Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, The
   Weakest Link and Deal or No Deal. The Price Is Right, which has aired
   on CBS since 1972, and Let's Make a Deal, which was revived on that
   same network in October 2009, are the only daytime game show remaining
   on the broadcast networks.

   American daytime soap operas have been running for over seven decades.
   Currently, there are four daytime soap operas in production: ABC's
   General Hospital, NBC's Days of our Lives, and CBS's The Young and the
   Restless and The Bold and the Beautiful. Long-running soaps no longer
   in production include Search for Tomorrow, Guiding Light, As the World
   Turns, Another World, One Life to Live and All My Children. The soap
   opera genre experienced a gradual decline beginning in the 1980s due to
   the continued migration of women into the workplace, culminating in six
   soaps being canceled by NBC, CBS and ABC between 2003 and 2011.
   Primetime soap operas of note have included Peyton Place, Dallas,
   Dynasty, Beverly Hills, 90210, Melrose Place and Revenge.

   Primetime comedy has included situation comedies such as I Love Lucy,
   The Honeymooners, The Andy Griffith Show, The Dick Van Dyke Show, The
   Mary Tyler Moore Show, All in the Family, M*A*S*H, Happy Days, Family
   Ties, Cheers, The Cosby Show, Seinfeld, Friends, Frasier, Everybody
   Loves Raymond, The King of Queens, How I Met Your Mother, The Big Bang
   Theory and Modern Family as well as sketch comedy/variety series such
   as Texaco Star Theatre, The Carol Burnett Show, Rowan and Martin's
   Laugh-In and Saturday Night Live.

   Dramatic series have taken many forms over the years. Westerns such as
   Gunsmoke had their greatest popularity in the 1950s and 1960s. Medical
   dramas such as Marcus Welby, M.D., St. Elsewhere, ER, House and Grey's
   Anatomy have endured success, as well as family dramas such as The
   Waltons and Little House on the Prairie, and crime dramas such as
   Dragnet, Hawaii Five-O, Hill Street Blues, Miami Vice, L.A. Law, 21
   Jump Street, Law & Order, JAG, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and NCIS.

   Dramedy, a term for a television series that mixes elements of comedy
   and drama, have seen its popularity grown among viewers, thanks to
   programs like Ally McBeal, Ugly Betty, Desperate Housewives, Devious
   Maids, Psych and Glee.

   Television series featuring fantasy and science fiction are also
   popular with American viewers, since these programs take elements of
   comedy, drama, adventure, or a combination of all of the above. Among
   the most notable fantasy series in this genre include Touched By an
   Angel (centering on angels helping humans in times of personal crisis),
   Bewitched (a sitcom centering on a witch adjusting to married life),
   Fantasy Island (which was set at a resort where people live out their
   fantasies, but at a price), Drop Dead Diva (focusing on a deceased
   model inhabiting the body of a lawyer), and Once Upon a Time (centering
   on fairytale characters that are trapped in the present day after a
   curse was enacted), while Star Trek, Battlestar Galactica and the
   British series Doctor Who rank among the most watched programs in the
   sci-fi genre.

   Reality television has long existed in the United States, both played
   for laughs (such as Candid Camera and Real People) and as drama (such
   as COPS and The Real World). A new variant – competition series placing
   ordinary people in unusual circumstances or in talent contests,
   generally eliminating at least one participant per week, exploded in
   popularity in turn of the millennium with shows such as Survivor, Big
   Brother, The Amazing Race, American Idol, America's Next Top Model, So
   You Think You Can Dance and The Voice.

   The most successful talk show has been the The Tonight Show,
   particularly during the 29-year run of third host Johnny Carson.
   Tonight ushered in a multi-decade period of dominance by one network –
   NBC – in American late-night programming and paved the way for many
   similar combinations of comedy and celebrity interviews, such as The
   Merv Griffin Show and Late Night with David Letterman. Daytime talk
   show hits have included Live! with Kelly and Michael (and its previous
   iterations), The Oprah Winfrey Show, Dr. Phil and The Ellen DeGeneres
   Show, which run the gamut from serious to lighthearted; a subset of
   so-called trash TV talk shows such as The Jerry Springer Show also
   veered into exploitation and titillation.

   Children's television programs are also quite popular. Early ventures
   into children's television in the 1950s aired on weekdays with shows
   like Howdy Doody, Captain Kangaroo and the Mickey Mouse Club. However
   children's programing had its greatest success on Saturday mornings
   from the 1960s to the early 1990s. Programs shown during these hours
   mainly consisted of animated programming including classic Looney
   Tunes, Tom and Jerry, Woody Woodpecker and Terrytoons cartoons, reruns
   of primetime animated sitcoms like The Flintstones and The Jetsons,
   foreign acquisitions like Astro Boy and Kimba the White Lion, animated
   adaptaions of Back to the Future, Ghostbusters, Batman, ALF and Star
   Trek, as well as the original broadcasts of The Rocky and Bullwinkle
   Show, Scooby-Doo, Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids, The Smurfs, Muppet
   Babies, Alvin and the Chipmunks, Garfield and Friends and Teenage
   Mutant Ninja Turtles. In recent years however, the FCC has introduced
   E/I restrictions that require all over-the-air broadcast networks and
   stations to air at least three hours of educational children's
   programming each week. This has made it much harder for broadcast
   stations to profit from children's programs compared to previous years,
   though PBS has long excelled in E/I programming with shows such as
   Sesame Street, Mister Rogers' Neighborhood, Teletubbies, Thomas the
   Tank Engine and Arthur. Today, the most popular children's programs
   have been produced for cable television networks such as Disney
   Channel, Nickelodeon and Cartoon Network, each of which are completely
   exempt from E/I restrictions. Their successful content has included
   Rugrats, SpongeBob SquarePants, The Fairly OddParents, Kim Possible,
   Hannah Montana, iCarly, Phineas & Ferb, Wizards of Waverly Place and
   Adventure Time, amongst others.

   While the majority of programs broadcast on American television are
   produced domestically, some programs carried in syndication, on public
   television or on cable television are imported from outside the U.S.;
   most commonly, these imported programs come from the primarily
   English-speaking countries of Canada and the United Kingdom. PBS in
   particular, is commonly known for its broadcasts of British comedies
   such as Monty Python's Flying Circus, Fawlty Towers, Are You Being
   Served?, Keeping Up Appearances and As Time Goes By, which typically
   air on most PBS member stations on weekend evenings (although their
   scheduling is at the discretion of the public television station). As
   for Canadian programs, most of the programming imported from Canada
   includes children's programs from family-oriented specialty channels
   YTV and Family Channel such as Are You Afraid of the Dark?, Naturally,
   Sadie and Life with Derek. Among some of the more well-known Canadian
   television series among American viewers include the Degrassi High
   franchise (which aired in Canada on CBC Television, with the later
   incarnation Degrassi: The Next Generation airing on CTV and presently
   MuchMusic), SCTV Network and The Red Green Show. American
   Spanish-language networks also import much of their programming; for
   example, Univision imports much of its programming, especially
   telenovelas that are broadcast on the network, from Mexican broadcaster
   Televisa and MundoFox distributes programming from Colombian
   broadcaster RCN Television.

The life cycle of U.S. television shows[edit]

   The cast of I Love Lucy (L-R): Desi Arnaz, Lucille Ball, Vivian Vance,
   and William Frawley. I Love Lucy has spent over 50 years in reruns
   after it ended in 1957.

   Television production companies either commission teleplays for
   television pilots or buy spec scripts. Some of these scripts are turned
   into pilots. The production company markets those they consider
   commercially viable to television networks – or television distributors
   for first-run syndication (for example, CBS Television Distribution
   distributes Dr. Phil in first-run syndication, because that show is
   syndicated – it is not carried with a particular network). A few things
   in consideration for a television network to pick up a show is if the
   show itself is compatible with the network's target audience, the cost
   of production, and if the show is well liked among network executives.

   Networks sometimes preemptively purchase pilots to prevent other
   networks from controlling them – and the purchase of a pilot is no
   guarantee that the network will order additional episodes. Pilots that
   do get "picked up" get either a full or partial-season order; the show
   goes into production, usually establishing itself with permanent sets.
   The producers hire writers, directors and other crew members, and work
   begins – usually during the late spring and summer before the fall
   season-series premieres (shows can also serve as a midseason
   replacement, meaning they are ordered specifically to fill holes in a
   network schedule created by the failure and cancellation of shows that
   premiered in the fall; Buffy the Vampire Slayer and The Office are
   examples of successful midseason replacements).

   The standard broadcast television season in the United States consists
   of 22 episodes; sitcoms may have 24 or more; animated programs may have
   more (or fewer) episodes; cable networks with original programming seem
   to have settled on about 10 to 13 episodes per season, much in line
   with British television programming.

   American soap operas air in the afternoon, five days a week, without
   any significant break in taping and airing schedules throughout the
   year. This means that these serials air approximately 260 episodes a
   year, making their cast and crew members the busiest in show business.
   These shows are rarely, if ever, repeated, making it difficult for
   viewers to "catch up" when they miss an episode. Cable channel SoapNet
   provided weekly repeats for some broadcasts until it shut down in
   December 2013, after which TVGN (originally a television listings
   service formerly known under several names including the Prevue
   Channel) began airing some network soaps in a same-day repeat.

   Networks use profits from commercials run during the show to pay the
   production company, which in turn pays the cast and crew, and keeps a
   share of the profits for itself (networks sometimes act as both
   production companies and distributors). As advertising rates are based
   on the size of the audience, measuring the number of people watching a
   network is very important. This measurement is known as a show or
   network's ratings. Sweeps months (which occur in November, February,
   May, and to a lesser extent July) are important landmarks in the
   television season – ratings earned during these periods determining
   advertising rates until the next sweeps period, therefore shows often
   have their most exciting plot developments happen during sweeps.

   Shows that are successful with audiences and advertisers receive
   authorization from the network to continue production, until the
   plotline ends (only for scripted shows) or if the contract expires.
   Those that are not successful are often quickly told to discontinue
   production by the network, known as cancellation. There are instances
   of initially low-rated shows surviving cancellation and later becoming
   highly popular, but these are rare. For the most part, shows that are
   not immediately or even moderately successful are cancelled by the end
   of November sweeps, if not shortly thereafter or earlier. Usually if a
   show is canceled, there is little chance of it ever coming back again
   especially on the same network it was canceled from; the only show in
   the U.S. to ever come back from cancellation on the same network is
   Family Guy (which was cancelled by Fox in 2002 and was revived by the
   network in 2005 due to the popularity of reruns on cable and DVD
   releases of the series). However, canceled shows like Scrubs,
   Southland, Medium and Wonder Woman have been picked up by other
   networks, which is becoming an increasingly common practice. It is also
   somewhat common for series to continue production on a series for the
   purpose of completing a DVD set, even if these episodes will never air
   on television (these episodes would, in years past, be "burned off" by
   airing them in less-prominent time slots).

   Once a television series reaches a threshold of approximately 88 to 100
   episodes, it becomes a candidate to enter reruns in off-network
   syndication. Reruns are a lucrative business for television producers,
   who can sell the rights to a "used" series without the expenses of
   producing it (though they may have to pay royalties to the affected
   parties, depending on union contracts).

   Sitcoms are traditionally the most widely syndicated reruns and are
   usually aired in a five-day-a-week strip. Marginally performing shows
   tend to last less than five years in broadcast syndication, sometimes
   moving to cable channels or into limited-run barter syndication (such
   as through The Program Exchange) after the end of their syndication
   runs, while more widely successful series can have a life in
   syndication that can run for decades (I Love Lucy, the first series
   designed to be rerun, remains popular in syndication more than 60 years
   after its 1951 debut).

   Cable networks and digital broadcast channels have provided outlets for
   programming that either has outlived its syndication viability, lacks
   the number of episodes necessary for syndication, or for various
   reasons was not a candidate for syndication in the first place. Popular
   dramas, for instance, have permanent homes on several basic cable
   channels, often running in marathons (multiple episodes airing
   back-to-back for several hours), and there are also cable channels
   devoted to game shows (Game Show Network), soap operas (the now-defunct
   SoapNet), Saturday morning cartoons (Boomerang) and even sports
   broadcasts (ESPN Classic). Most reality shows perform poorly in reruns
   and are rarely seen as a result, other than reruns of series still in
   production, on the same network on which they air (almost always cable
   outlets), where they air as filler programming.

Regulation[edit]

   Broadcast television is regulated by the Federal Communications
   Commission (FCC). The FCC awards licenses to local stations, which
   stipulate stations' commitments to educational and public-interest
   programming. The FCC also prohibits the airing of "indecent" material
   over the air between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

   Broadcast stations can legally air almost anything they want late at
   night – and cable networks at all hours. However, nudity and graphic
   profanity are rare on American television. Such content, however, is
   common on pay television services that are free from FCC regulations
   and pressure from advertisers, and often require a subscription.
   Broadcasters fear that airing such material would alienate advertisers
   and encourage the federal government to strengthen regulation of
   television content.

   Premium cable networks are exceptions, and often air very racy
   programming at night, though premium channels often air program content
   with strong to graphic profanity, violence and nudity in some cases
   during the daytime hours. Some networks, such as Playboy TV, are
   devoted exclusively to "adult" content and therefore viewers may find
   scenes of simulated or graphic sexual intercourse and nudity on such
   channels.

   Cable television is largely, but not entirely, unregulated. Cable
   systems must include local over-the-air stations in their offerings
   (stations can opt to gain carriage by seeking a must-carry option) and
   give them low channel numbers, unless the stations decide to demand
   compensation of any sort (through retransmission consent).

   The systems cannot show broadcast network affiliates from other parts
   of the country (this regulation has largely been openly ignored in
   recent years during carriage disputes), however cable systems can air
   stations out of nearby markets if there are no stations affiliated with
   one of the major networks (though this is becoming far less common with
   the existence of over-the air stations carrying one network affiliation
   on the main channel, and affiliating with another network on a digital
   subchannel, thus allowing these network-affiliated digital subchannels
   to be carried via digital cable).

   Cable systems can also air satellite-relayed over-the-air stations
   originating from other areas of the United States, known as
   superstations (of which there are currently only six around the
   country, the most prominent being WGN America, which airs select
   programming carried by WGN-TV in Chicago), which for the most part are
   often aired in rural areas and if carried nationally, may have a
   separate feed carrying different programming than that of the local
   area feed that is SyndEx-proof (in other words, syndicated programming
   that the superstation has obtained full signal rights to) and may omit
   network programming from that station's network affiliation; all
   superstations, are currently affiliated with a broadcast television
   network: WGN-TV, WPIX in New York City, KWGN in Denver and KTLA in Los
   Angeles are all affiliated with The CW, and WWOR-TV in Secaucus, New
   Jersey and WSBK-TV in Boston are affiliated with MyNetworkTV.

   The FCC has virtually no jurisdiction over the content of programming
   exclusively broadcast on cable. As a result, anyone is free to create
   any number of channels or any sort of programming whatsoever without
   consulting the FCC. The only restrictions are on the ability to secure
   carriage on cable or satellite (or, failing that, by streaming on
   Internet television) and securing rights to programming. Because of
   this lack of restriction, channel drift is much more common in the
   United States than in other countries.

   Because of the United States having relatively weak copyright terms
   until 1976, a large body of older television series have lapsed into
   the public domain and are thus free to redistribute in any form.

History of American television[edit]

   Main articles: History of television and List of United States network
   television schedules
   American family watching TV, 1958.

   After years of experimental broadcasts, television first became
   commercialized in the United States in New York City on July 1, 1941,
   initially by RCA (through NBC, which it owned) via their station WNBT
   (now WNBC) and CBS, via their station WCBW (now WCBS-TV). A number of
   different broadcast systems had been developed through the end of the
   1930s. The National Television System Committee (NTSC) standardized on
   a 525-line broadcast in 1941 that would provide the basis for
   television across the country through the end of the century.

   Television development halted with the onset of World War II, but a few
   pioneer stations remained on the air throughout the war, primarily WNBT
   (now WNBC), WCBW (now WCBS-TV) and WABD (the former W2XWV, which went
   commercial in 1944, owned by the DuMont Television Network, now WNYW)
   in New York City, WRGB in Schenectady, New York (owned by General
   Electric), WPTZ (now KYW-TV) in Philadelphia (owned by Philco), W9XBK
   (now WBBM-TV) in Chicago, as well as W6XAO (now KCBS-TV) and W6XYZ (now
   KTLA) in Los Angeles. When that conflict ended, these stations expanded
   their broadcast schedules and many other organizations applied for
   television station licenses.

   After a flood of television license applications, the FCC froze the
   application process for new applicants in 1948, due to concerns over
   station interference. At the time, there were only a few dozen stations
   operating at the end of the decade, concentrated in many (but not all)
   major cities. The FCC began handing out broadcasting licenses to
   communities of all sizes in the early 1950s, spurring an explosion of
   growth in the medium.

   A brief dispute over the system to use for color broadcasts occurred at
   this time, but was soon settled. Half of all U.S. households had
   television sets by 1955, though color was a premium feature for many
   years (most households able to purchase television sets could only
   afford black-and-white models, and few programs were broadcast in color
   until the mid-1960s).

   Many of the earliest television programs were modified versions of
   well-established radio shows. Barn dances and opries were regular
   staples of early television, as were the first variety shows. Reruns of
   film shorts, such as Looney Tunes, Our Gang and The Three Stooges, were
   also staples of early television and to a certain extent remain popular
   today. The 1950s saw the first flowering of the genres that would
   distinguish television from movies and radio: talk shows like The Jack
   Paar Show and sitcoms like I Love Lucy. Although sitcoms were a radio
   fixture since the late 1930s (many 1940s radio sitcoms jumped directly
   to television), television allowed far greater use of physical comedy,
   an advantage that early television sitcoms used to its full potential.

   Other popular genera in early television were westerns, police
   procedurals, suspense thrillers and soap operas, all of which were
   adapted from the radio medium. Anthology television series and wheel
   series thrived in the so-called “Golden Age of Television” but
   eventually faded in popularity by the 1970s. The big band remote, for
   the most part, did not survive, with two exceptions: The Lawrence Welk
   Show, a big band-driven musical variety show, ran from 1951 until
   Welk's retirement in 1982 and in reruns from then onward, and Guy
   Lombardo's annual New Year big-band remotes ran until 1979, two years
   after Lombardo's death. Game shows were also a major part of the early
   part of television, aided by massive prizes unheard of in the radio
   era; however, the pressure to keep the programs entertaining led to the
   quiz show scandals in which it was revealed many of the popular
   high-stakes games were rigged or outright scripted. The Saturday
   morning cartoons, animated productions made specifically for television
   (and, accordingly, with much tighter budgets and more limited
   animation), also debuted in the late 1950s.

   Television in the United States was primarily broadcast on the VHF band
   (channels 2-13) in its earliest years; it was not until the All-Channel
   Receiver Act of 1964 that UHF television broadcasting became a feasible
   medium.

   Over the course of the 1960s and 1970s, concurrent with the development
   of color television, the evolution of television led to an event
   colloquially known as the rural purge; generae such as the panel game
   show, western, variety show, barn dance, and rural-oriented sitcom all
   met their demise in favor of newer, more modern series targeted at
   wealthier suburban and urban viewers. Around the same time, videotape
   became a more affordable alternative to film for recording programs.

   Stations across the country also produced their own local programs.
   Usually carried live, they ranged from simple advertisements to game
   shows and children's shows that often featured clowns and other offbeat
   characters. Local programs could often be popular and profitable, but
   concerns about product promotion led them to almost completely
   disappear by the mid-1970s. The last remaining locally originated shows
   on American television as of 2012 are local newscasts and some brokered
   programming paid for by advertisers.

   Subscription television became popular in the early 1980s when cable
   television began, followed by the emergence of direct broadcast
   satellites in the 1990s, and has been growing in significance since
   then – spurring the emergence of multinational conglomerates such as
   Fox. As the number of outlets for potential new television channels
   increased, this also introduced the threat of audience fracturing, in
   that it would become more difficult to attain a critical mass of
   viewers in this highly competitive market. (Free-to-air satellite had a
   brief uptick in popularity during the 1980s but never achieved
   mainstream popularity.)

   As ratings declined, the number of game shows and soap operas followed,
   with the former genre almost completely disappearing from American
   daytime television, to be replaced by much cheaper and more lowbrow
   tabloid talk shows, many of which in turn were canceled and replaced by
   televised binding arbitration court shows beginning in the late 1990s.

   Infomercials were legalized in 1984, approximately the same time that
   cable television became widespread. Over the course of the 1980s and
   1990s, stations began airing infomercials throughout the night instead
   of signing off; infomercials also began to overtake other less-watched
   dayparts (such as weekends and during the daytime), which forced series
   that would otherwise be syndicated onto cable networks or off the air
   entirely. Cable networks have also begun selling infomercial space,
   usually in multiple-hour blocks in the early morning hours.
   Infomercials have earned a reputation as a medium for advertising scams
   and products of dubious quality.

   The U.S. has now moved to digital television. The major U.S. networks
   began transitioning to recording their programs in high-definition
   television (HD) in the late 1990s, beginning with prime time programs
   and eventually to daytime shows in the mid-2000s; the upgrade to full
   HD network schedules will be fully complete by September 2014 when the
   last standard-definition programs upgrade to HD. A law passed in 2006
   required over-the-air stations to cease analog broadcasting in 2009,
   with the end of analog television arriving on June 12 of that
   year.^[15] Low-power television stations have until September 2015 to
   end analog broadcasting; most have already transitioned to digital as
   of 2014, with the exception of the "87.7 FM" outlets, which operate
   primarily as radio stations by using the audio of analog channel 6 to
   broadcast to FM radios. There was an uptick in the number of "87.7"
   stations after the full-power transition, as low-power stations above
   channel 51 (channels 52 to 69 were removed from the television spectrum
   as part of the transition) were required to choose a new channel
   allocation; many chose channel 6, as it allowed for the usage of the
   87.7 audio channel to reach a wider audience.

   The late 1990s also saw the invention of digital video recorders. While
   the ability to record a television program for home viewing was
   possible with the earlier VCRs, that medium was a bulky mechanical tape
   medium that was far less convenient than the all-digital technology
   DVRs use. DVR technology allowed wide-scale time shifting of
   programming, which had a negative impact on programming in time slots
   outside of prime time by allowing viewers to watch their favorite
   programs on demand. It also put pressure on advertisers, since DVRs
   make it relatively easy to skip over commercials.

   During the 2000s, the major development in U.S. television programming
   was the growth of reality television, which proved to be an inexpensive
   and entertaining alternative to scripted prime time programming. The
   process of nonlinear video editing and digital recording allowed for
   much easier and less expensive editing of mass amounts of video, making
   reality television more viable than it had been in previous decades.
   All four major broadcast networks carry at least one long-running
   reality franchise in their lineup at any given time of the year.

   In 2008, there were an estimated 327 million television sets in the
   United States.

See also[edit]

   Portal icon Television in the United States portal
   Portal icon United States portal
   Portal icon Television portal
     * List of television stations in the United States
     * List of United States over-the-air television networks

References[edit]

    1. ^ Ownership of TV Sets Falls in U.S., May 3, 2011
    2. ^
       http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2007/08/28/us-television-household
       s-by-season/273/
    3. ^ FCC V-Chip Fact Sheet, 7/1/99
    4. ^ Seidman, Robert (August 23, 2013). "List of How Many Homes Each
       Cable Networks Is In - Cable Network Coverage Estimates As Of
       August 2013". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Retrieved September 7,
       2013.
    5. ^ "Barely Keeping Up in TV's New Golden Age". Retrieved 9 July
       2014.
    6. ^ "Welcome to TV's Second Golden Age". Retrieved 9 July 2014.
    7. ^ Itzkoff, Dave (12 January 2014). "For TV Fans, Cramming In
       Sunday’s Best". Retrieved 19 July 2014.
    8. ^ McFarland, Melanie (20 September 2006). "On TV: Thursday night
       throwdown". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved 19 July 2014.
    9. ^ CBS, NBC Battle for AFC Rights // Fox Steals NFC Package, Chicago
       Sun-Times (via HighBeam Research), December 18, 1993.
   10. ^ 'Gilmore Girls' meet 'Smackdown'; CW Network to combine WB, UPN
       in CBS-Warner venture beginning in September, CNNMoney.com, January
       24, 2006.
   11. ^ UPN and WB to Combine, Forming New TV Network, The New York
       Times, January 24, 2006.
   12. ^ "News Corp. to launch new mini-network for UPN stations". USA
       Today. February 22, 2006. Retrieved January 21, 2013.
   13. ^ News Corp. Unveils MyNetworkTV, Broadcasting & Cable, February
       22, 2006.
   14. ^ Consumers wary of Comcast, Time Warner Cable merger - USA Today,
       13 February 2014
   15. ^ Steiner, Tobias. "Convergence in the US Television Market between
       2000 and 2012, from a User's perspective". academia.edu. Retrieved
       15 Aug 2012.

External links[edit]

     * The Museum of Television & Radio
     * Museum of Broadcast Communications: The Encyclopedia of Television
     * Academy of Television Arts & Sciences
     * Now with Bill Moyers: Politics & Media - Big Media - Media
       Regulation Timeline
     * FCC: Television Technology - A Short History
     * Turner:Cable Primed to Beat Broadcast, by Anthony Crupi, Mediaweek
       Dec. 7, 2005.
     * AAAA/ANA Annual Study Shows TV Clutter Levels Up Across Most
       Dayparts by the Association of National Advertisers, Feb. 14, 2002.
     * Live American TV


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications
   History

     * Beacon
     * Broadcasting
     * Communications satellite
     * Computer network
     * Drums
     * Electrical telegraph
     * Fax
     * Heliographs
     * Hydraulic telegraph
     * Internet
     * Mass media
     * Mobile phone
     * Optical telecommunication
     * Optical telegraphy
     * Photophone
     * Prepaid mobile phone
     * Radio
     * Radiotelephone
     * Satellite communications
     * Smoke signals
     * Telecommunications history
     * Telegraphy
     * Telephone
     * The Telephone Cases
     * Television
     * Timeline of communication technology
     * Undersea telegraph line
     * Videoconferencing
     * Videophone
     * Videotelephony

                                           Telecommunications symbol
   Pioneers

     * Edwin Howard Armstrong
     * John Logie Baird
     * Alexander Graham Bell
     * Tim Berners-Lee
     * Jagadish Chandra Bose
     * Vint Cerf
     * Claude Chappe
     * Lee de Forest
     * Philo Farnsworth
     * Reginald Fessenden
     * Elisha Gray
     * Guglielmo Marconi
     * Alexander Stepanovich Popov
     * Johann Philipp Reis
     * Nikola Tesla
     * Camille Papin Tissot
     * Alfred Vail
     * Charles Wheatstone
     * Vladimir K. Zworykin

   Transmission
   media
     * Coaxial cable
     * Free-space optical
     * Optical fiber
     * Radio waves
     * Telephone lines
     * Terrestrial microwave

   Network topology
   and switching
     * Links
     * Nodes
     * Terminal node
     * Network switching (circuit
     * packet)
     * Telephone exchange

   Multiplexing
     * Space-division
     * Frequency-division
     * Time-division
     * Polarization-division
     * Orbital angular-momentum
     * Code-division

   Networks
     * ARPANET
     * BITNET
     * Computer
     * Ethernet
     * FidoNet
     * Internet
     * ISDN
     * LAN
     * Mobile
     * NGN
     * Public Switched Telephone
     * Radio
     * Telecommunications equipment
     * Television
     * Telex
     * WAN
     * Wireless
     * World Wide Web

   By continent
     * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications in Africa
   Sovereign states
     * Algeria
     * Angola
     * Benin
     * Botswana
     * Burkina Faso
     * Burundi
     * Cameroon
     * Cape Verde
     * Central African Republic
     * Chad
     * Comoros
     * Democratic Republic of the Congo
     * Republic of the Congo
     * Djibouti
     * Egypt
     * Equatorial Guinea
     * Eritrea
     * Ethiopia
     * Gabon
     * The Gambia
     * Ghana
     * Guinea
     * Guinea-Bissau
     * Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
     * Kenya
     * Lesotho
     * Liberia
     * Libya
     * Madagascar
     * Malawi
     * Mali
     * Mauritania
     * Mauritius
     * Morocco
     * Mozambique
     * Namibia
     * Niger
     * Nigeria
     * Rwanda
     * São Tomé and Príncipe
     * Senegal
     * Seychelles
     * Sierra Leone
     * Somalia
     * South Africa
     * South Sudan
     * Sudan
     * Swaziland
     * Tanzania
     * Togo
     * Tunisia
     * Uganda
     * Zambia
     * Zimbabwe

   States with limited
   recognition
     * Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
     * Somaliland

   Dependencies and
   other territories
     * Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / Plazas de soberanía (Spain)
     * Madeira (Portugal)
     * Mayotte / Réunion (France)
     * Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
     * Western Sahara

                  * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications in Asia
    Sovereign states
                         * Afghanistan
                         * Armenia
                         * Azerbaijan
                         * Bahrain
                         * Bangladesh
                         * Bhutan
                         * Brunei
                         * Burma (Myanmar)
                         * Cambodia
                         * China
                         * Cyprus
                         * East Timor (Timor-Leste)
                         * Egypt
                         * Georgia
                         * India
                         * Indonesia
                         * Iran
                         * Iraq
                         * Israel
                         * Japan
                         * Jordan
                         * Kazakhstan
                         * North Korea
                         * South Korea
                         * Kuwait
                         * Kyrgyzstan
                         * Laos
                         * Lebanon
                         * Malaysia
                         * Maldives
                         * Mongolia
                         * Nepal
                         * Oman
                         * Pakistan
                         * Philippines
                         * Qatar
                         * Russia
                         * Saudi Arabia
                         * Singapore
                         * Sri Lanka
                         * Syria
                         * Tajikistan
                         * Thailand
                         * Turkey
                         * Turkmenistan
                         * United Arab Emirates
                         * Uzbekistan
                         * Vietnam
                         * Yemen

       States with
   limited recognition
                         * Abkhazia
                         * Nagorno-Karabakh
                         * Northern Cyprus
                         * Palestine
                         * South Ossetia
                         * Taiwan

    Dependencies and
   other territories
                         * British Indian Ocean Territory
                         * Christmas Island
                         * Cocos (Keeling) Islands
                         * Hong Kong
                         * Macau

             * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications in Europe
    Sovereign states
                        * Albania
                        * Andorra
                        * Armenia
                        * Austria
                        * Azerbaijan
                        * Belarus
                        * Belgium
                        * Bosnia and Herzegovina
                        * Bulgaria
                        * Croatia
                        * Cyprus
                        * Czech Republic
                        * Denmark
                        * Estonia
                        * Finland
                        * France
                        * Georgia
                        * Germany
                        * Greece
                        * Hungary
                        * Iceland
                        * Ireland
                        * Italy
                        * Kazakhstan
                        * Latvia
                        * Liechtenstein
                        * Lithuania
                        * Luxembourg
                        * Macedonia
                        * Malta
                        * Moldova
                        * Monaco
                        * Montenegro
                        * Netherlands
                        * Norway
                        * Poland
                        * Portugal
                        * Romania
                        * Russia
                        * San Marino
                        * Serbia
                        * Slovakia
                        * Slovenia
                        * Spain
                        * Sweden
                        * Switzerland
                        * Turkey
                        * Ukraine
                        * United Kingdom

   States with limited
   recognition
                        * Abkhazia
                        * Kosovo
                        * Nagorno-Karabakh
                        * Northern Cyprus
                        * South Ossetia
                        * Transnistria

    Dependencies and
   other territories
                        * Åland
                        * Faroe Islands
                        * Gibraltar
                        * Guernsey
                        * Jersey
                        * Isle of Man
                        * Svalbard

     Other entities
                        * European Union

             * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications in North America
   Sovereign states
                      * Antigua and Barbuda
                      * Bahamas
                      * Barbados
                      * Belize
                      * Canada
                      * Costa Rica
                      * Cuba
                      * Dominica
                      * Dominican Republic
                      * El Salvador
                      * Grenada
                      * Guatemala
                      * Haiti
                      * Honduras
                      * Jamaica
                      * Mexico
                      * Nicaragua
                      * Panama
                      * Saint Kitts and Nevis
                      * Saint Lucia
                      * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
                      * Trinidad and Tobago
                      * United States

   Dependencies and
   other territories
                      * Anguilla
                      * Aruba
                      * Bermuda
                      * Bonaire
                      * British Virgin Islands
                      * Cayman Islands
                      * Curaçao
                      * Greenland
                      * Guadeloupe
                      * Martinique
                      * Montserrat
                      * Navassa Island
                      * Puerto Rico
                      * Saint Barthélemy
                      * Saint Martin
                      * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
                      * Saba
                      * Sint Eustatius
                      * Sint Maarten
                      * Turks and Caicos Islands
                      * United States Virgin Islands

                        * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications in Oceania
            Sovereign states
                                        * Australia
                                        * East Timor
                                        * Fiji
                                        * Kiribati
                                        * Marshall Islands
                                        * Federated States of Micronesia
                                        * Nauru
                                        * New Zealand
                                        * Palau
                                        * Papua New Guinea
                                        * Samoa
                                        * Solomon Islands
                                        * Tonga
                                        * Tuvalu
                                        * Vanuatu

    Associated states of New Zealand
                                        * Cook Islands
                                        * Niue

   Dependencies and other territories
                                        * American Samoa
                                        * Christmas Island
                                        * Cocos (Keeling) Islands
                                        * Easter Island
                                        * French Polynesia
                                        * Guam
                                        * Hawaii
                                        * New Caledonia
                                        * Norfolk Island
                                        * Northern Mariana Islands
                                        * Pitcairn Islands
                                        * Tokelau
                                        * Wallis and Futuna

                   * v
     * t
     * e

   Telecommunications in South America
   Sovereign states
                      * Argentina
                      * Bolivia
                      * Brazil
                      * Chile
                      * Colombia
                      * Ecuador
                      * Guyana
                      * Paraguay
                      * Peru
                      * Suriname
                      * Uruguay
                      * Venezuela

   Dependencies and
   other territories
                      * Falkland Islands
                      * French Guiana
                      * South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

   Category Telecommunications · Telecommunication · Portal
   Telecommunication

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Television in the United States
   Stations and networks
     * TV Networks
          + Big Three
          + Fourth television network
     * Cable television in the United States
     * High-definition television in the United States
     * Satellite television in the United States
     * List of television stations in the United States
     * List of HD channels in the United States

   Awards and events
     * Emmy Award (Primetime, Daytime, Sports, News & Documentary,
       Technology & Engineering)
     * Directors Guild of America Award
     * Producers Guild of America Award
     * Writers Guild of America Award
     * Golden Globes
     * Screen Actors Guild Award
     * TCA Awards
     * Critics' Choice TV Award
     * Peabody Award
     * People's Choice Awards
     * NAACP Image Award
     * Eddie Awards
     * Artios Award
     * American Society of Cinematographers Awards
     * Humanitas Prize
     * ADG Excellence in Production Design Award
     * Hugo Award
     * Visual Effects Society Awards
     * Golden Reel Award


                 * v
     * t
     * e

   Television in North America
   Sovereign states
                      * Antigua and Barbuda
                      * Bahamas
                      * Barbados
                      * Belize
                      * Canada
                      * Costa Rica
                      * Cuba
                      * Dominica
                      * Dominican Republic
                      * El Salvador
                      * Grenada
                      * Guatemala
                      * Haiti
                      * Honduras
                      * Jamaica
                      * Mexico
                      * Nicaragua
                      * Panama
                      * Saint Kitts and Nevis
                      * Saint Lucia
                      * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
                      * Trinidad and Tobago
                      * United States

   Dependencies and
   other territories
                      * Anguilla
                      * Aruba
                      * Bermuda
                      * Bonaire
                      * British Virgin Islands
                      * Cayman Islands
                      * Curaçao
                      * Greenland
                      * Guadeloupe
                      * Martinique
                      * Montserrat
                      * Puerto Rico
                      * Saint Barthélemy
                      * Saint Martin
                      * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
                      * Saba
                      * Sint Eustatius
                      * Sint Maarten
                      * Turks and Caicos Islands
                      * United States Virgin Islands

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Television_in_the_United_Sta
   tes&oldid=625341433"
   Categories:
     * Television in the United States

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2012
     * All articles lacking in-text citations
     * Articles needing additional references from February 2014
     * All articles needing additional references

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * Français
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Italiano
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * Português
     * Русский
     * Svenska
     * ไทย
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 13 September 2014 at 07:17.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
