   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

United States Coast Guard

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   United States Coast Guard
   US-CoastGuard-Seal.svg
   United States Coast Guard portal
   Active 4 August 1790 – present
   (224 years, 1 month)^[1]
   Country  United States of America
   Type Coast guard
   Role Coastal defense, maritime law enforcement
   Size Civilian employees: 8,722
   Active duty personnel: 42,190
   Selected reservists: 7,899
   Auxiliary: 32,156
   244 cutters
   1,850 boats
   204 aircraft^[2]^[3]
   Part of Department of Homeland Security (2003–present)^[4]
   U.S. Department of Transportation (1967–2003)^[4]
   U.S. Department of the Treasury (1946–1967)^[5]
   U.S. Department of the Navy (1941–1946)^[6]
   Seal of the United States Department of the Treasury (1789-1968).png
   U.S. Department of the Treasury (1919–1946)^[7]
   U.S. Department of the Navy (1917–1919)^[8]
   Seal of the United States Department of the Treasury (1789-1968).png
   U.S. Department of the Treasury (1915-1917)^[9]^[Note 1]
   Motto Semper Paratus (English: Always ready)
   Colors White, CG Blue, CG Red^[10]
   March "Semper Paratus"
   Engagements
     * Quasi-War
     * War of 1812
     * Seminole Wars
     * Mexican–American War
     * American Civil War
     * Bering Sea Arbitration
     * Spanish–American War
     * World War I
     * World War II
     * Korean War
     * Vietnam War
          + Operation Sea Dragon III
     * Persian Gulf War
     * Operation Allied Force
     * Operation Enduring Freedom
          + Afghanistan
          + Philippines
          + Horn of Africa
          + Pankisi Gorge
          + Trans Sahara
          + Caribbean and Central America
     * Iraq War

   Decorations USA - CG PUC Hurricane Katrina.png Presidential Unit
   Citation
   Commanders
   Secretary of Homeland Security The Honorable Jeh Johnson
   Commandant ADM Paul F. Zukunft
   Vice Commandant VADM Peter V. Neffenger
   Master Chief Petty Officer MCPOCG Steven W. Cantrell
   Insignia
   Racing Stripe CGMark W.svg
   Ensign (1953-present) Ensign of the United States Coast Guard.svg
   Standard Flag of the United States Coast Guard.svg
   Fin flash (Fixed Wing) Roundel of the USAF.svg

   The United States Coast Guard (USCG) is a branch of the United States
   Armed Forces and one of the country's seven uniformed services. The
   Coast Guard is a maritime, military, multi-mission service unique among
   the U.S. military branches for having a maritime law enforcement
   mission (with jurisdiction in both domestic and international waters)
   and a federal regulatory agency mission as part of its mission set. It
   operates under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security during
   peacetime, and can be transferred to the U.S. Department of the Navy by
   the U.S. President at any time, or by the U.S. Congress during times of
   war. To date, this has happened twice, in 1917 and 1941, during World
   War I and World War II, respectively.^[6]^[8]

   Created by Congress on 4 August 1790 at the request of Alexander
   Hamilton as the "Revenue Marine", it is the oldest continuous seagoing
   service of the United States, although the U.S. Navy lists its founding
   as 1775, the formation of the Continental Navy. However, that was
   disbanded in 1785, and the modern U.S. Navy in its present form was
   founded in 1794. As Secretary of the Treasury, Hamilton headed the
   Revenue Marine, whose original purpose was that of a collector of
   customs duties in the nation's seaports. By the 1860s the service was
   known as the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the term Revenue Marine
   gradually fell into disuse.^[11]

   The Coast Guard was formed from the merger of the Revenue Cutter
   Service and the U.S. Life-Saving Service on 28 January 1915, as an
   organization under the U.S. Department of the Treasury. As one of the
   country's five armed services, the Coast Guard has been involved in
   every war from 1790 up to the Iraq War^[12] and the War in
   Afghanistan.^[13] As of 2012^[update] the Coast Guard had approximately
   42,000 men and women on active duty, 7,900 reservists, 32,000
   auxiliarists, and 8,700 full-time civilian employees.^[2] In terms of
   size, the U.S. Coast Guard by itself is the world's 12th largest naval
   force.^[14]

   The Coast Guard's legal authority differs from the other four armed
   services: it operates simultaneously under Title 10 of the U.S. Code
   and its other organic authorities, e.g. Titles 6, 14, 19, 33, 46, etc.
   Because of its legal authority, the Coast Guard can conduct military
   operations under the U.S. Department of Defense or directly for the
   President in accordance with Title 14 USC 1–3. The Coast Guard's
   enduring roles are maritime safety, security, and stewardship. To carry
   out those roles the Coast Guard has 11 statutory missions as defined in
   6 U.S.C. § 468, which include enforcing U.S. law in the world's largest
   exclusive economic zone of 3.4 million square miles
   (8,800,000 km^2).^[15] The Coast Guard motto is Semper Paratus
   (English: Always ready).

Contents

     * 1 Mission
          + 1.1 Role
          + 1.2 Missions
               o 1.2.1 Non-homeland security missions
               o 1.2.2 Homeland security missions
          + 1.3 Search and Rescue
          + 1.4 National Response Center
          + 1.5 Authority as an armed service
          + 1.6 Authority as a law enforcement agency
     * 2 History
     * 3 Organization
          + 3.1 Shore establishments
     * 4 Personnel
          + 4.1 Commissioned officers
          + 4.2 Warrant officers
          + 4.3 Enlisted personnel
          + 4.4 Women in the Coast Guard
          + 4.5 Training
               o 4.5.1 Officer training
               o 4.5.2 Recruit training
               o 4.5.3 Service schools
          + 4.6 Civilian personnel
     * 5 Equipment
          + 5.1 Cutters
          + 5.2 Aircraft
          + 5.3 Boats
          + 5.4 Weapons
     * 6 Symbols
          + 6.1 Core values
          + 6.2 The Guardian Ethos
          + 6.3 The Coast Guard Ethos
          + 6.4 Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman
          + 6.5 "You have to go out, but you don't have to come back!"
          + 6.6 Coast Guard Ensign
          + 6.7 Coast Guard Standard
          + 6.8 Service Mark ("Racing Stripe")
          + 6.9 Semper Paratus
          + 6.10 Colors
     * 7 Uniforms
     * 8 Issues
     * 9 Deployable Operations Group
     * 10 Coast Guard Reserve
     * 11 Coast Guard Auxiliary
     * 12 Medals and honors
     * 13 Organizations
          + 13.1 Coast Guard Aviation Association
          + 13.2 Coast Guard CW Operators Association
          + 13.3 USCG Chief Petty Officers Association
          + 13.4 USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association
            (CWOA)
     * 14 Notable Coast Guardsmen
     * 15 In popular culture
          + 15.1 In video games
          + 15.2 In literature
          + 15.3 In film
          + 15.4 In television
     * 16 See also
          + 16.1 Coast Guard
          + 16.2 Related agencies
     * 17 Notes
     * 18 Further reading
     * 19 External links

Mission[edit]

   Main article: Missions of the United States Coast Guard

Role[edit]

   A boatswain’s mate watches from the side port door as Coast Guard
   Cutter Bertholf’s Over-The-Horizon small boat departs to receive
   personnel from Coast Guard Cutter Chandeleur.

   The Coast Guard has roles in maritime homeland security, maritime law
   enforcement (MLE), search and rescue (SAR), marine environmental
   protection (MEP), and the maintenance of river, intracoastal and
   offshore aids to navigation (ATON).

   With a decentralized organization and much responsibility placed on
   even the most junior personnel, the Coast Guard is frequently lauded
   for its quick responsiveness and adaptability in a broad range of
   emergencies. In a 2005 article in Time magazine following Hurricane
   Katrina, the author wrote, "the Coast Guard's most valuable
   contribution to [a military effort when catastrophe hits] may be as a
   model of flexibility, and most of all, spirit." Wil Milam, a rescue
   swimmer from Alaska told the magazine, "In the Navy, it was all about
   the mission. Practicing for war, training for war. In the Coast Guard,
   it was, take care of our people and the mission will take care of
   itself."^[16]

Missions[edit]

   A Coast Guard rescue swimmer assisting with the rescue of a pregnant
   woman during Hurricane Katrina.

   The Coast Guard carries out three basic roles, which are further
   subdivided into eleven statutory missions. The three roles are:
     * Maritime safety
     * Maritime security
     * Maritime stewardship

   The eleven statutory missions as defined by law are divided into
   homeland security missions and non-homeland security missions:^[17]

Non-homeland security missions[edit]

     * Ice operations
     * Living marine resources (fisheries law enforcement)
     * Marine environmental protection
     * Marine safety
     * Aids to navigation
     * Search and rescue

Homeland security missions[edit]

     * Defense readiness
     * Maritime law enforcement
     * Migrant interdiction
     * Ports, waterways and coastal security (PWCS)
     * Drug interdiction

Search and Rescue[edit]

   Search and Rescue Program Logo of the United States Coast Guard.

          See National Search and Rescue Committee^[18]
          See Joint Rescue Coordination Centers

   While not the oldest, search and rescue (SAR) is one of the Coast
   Guard's best known missions. The National Search and Rescue Plan^[19]
   designates the Coast Guard as the federal agency responsible for
   maritime SAR operations, and the United States Air Force as the federal
   agency responsible for inland SAR. Both agencies maintain rescue
   coordination centers to coordinate this effort, and have responsibility
   for both military and civilian search and rescue.^[20] The two services
   jointly provide instructor staff for the National Search and Rescue
   School that trains SAR mission planners and coordinators. Previously
   located on Governor's Island, New York, the school is now located at
   Coast Guard Training Center Yorktown at Yorktown, Virginia.

National Response Center[edit]

   Operated by the Coast Guard, the National Response Center (NRC)^[21] is
   the sole U.S. Government point of contact for reporting all oil,
   chemical, radiological, biological, and etiological discharges into the
   environment anywhere in the United States and its territories. In
   addition to gathering and distributing spill data for Federal On Scene
   Coordinators and serving as the communications and operations center
   for the National Response Team, the NRC maintains agreements with a
   variety of federal entities to make additional notifications regarding
   incidents meeting established trigger criteria. The NRC also takes
   Terrorist/Suspicious Activity Reports and Maritime Security Breach
   Reports. Details on the NRC organization and specific responsibilities
   can be found in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
   Contingency Plan.^[22] The Marine Information for Safety and Law
   Enforcement (MISLE) database system is managed and used by the Coast
   Guard for tracking pollution and safety incidents in the nation's
   ports.

Authority as an armed service[edit]

   Members of the Coast Guard Maritime Security Response Team (MSRT) hook
   and climb onto a target

   The five uniformed services that make up the Armed Forces are defined
   in Title 10 of the United States Code:

     The term "armed forces" means the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine
     Corps, and Coast Guard.^[23]

   The Coast Guard is further defined by Title 14 of the United States
   Code:

     The Coast Guard as established January 28, 1915, shall be a military
     service and a branch of the armed forces of the United States at all
     times. The Coast Guard shall be a service in the Department of
     Homeland Security, except when operating as a service in the
     Navy.^[24]

   Coast Guard organization and operation is as set forth in Title 33 of
   the Code of Federal Regulations.

   On 25 November 2002, the Homeland Security Act was signed into law by
   U.S. President George W. Bush, designating the Coast Guard to be placed
   under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The transfer of
   administrative control from the U.S. Department of Transportation to
   the U.S. Department of Homeland Security was completed the following
   year, on 1 March 2003.^[4]^[25]^[26]

   The U.S. Coast Guard reports directly to the Secretary of Homeland
   Security. However, under 14 U.S.C. § 3 as amended by section 211 of the
   Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2006, upon the
   declaration of war and when Congress so directs in the declaration, or
   when the President directs, the Coast Guard operates under the
   Department of Defense as a service in the Department of the Navy.

   As members of the military, Coast Guardsmen on active and reserve
   service are subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice and receive
   the same pay and allowances as members of the same pay grades in the
   other uniformed services.

   The service has participated in every major U.S. conflict from 1790
   through today, including landing troops on D-Day and on the Pacific
   Islands in World War II, in extensive patrols and shore bombardment
   during the Vietnam War, and multiple roles in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
   Maritime interception operations, coastal security, transportation
   security, and law enforcement detachments have been its major roles in
   recent conflicts in Iraq.

   On 17 October 2007, the Coast Guard joined with the U.S. Navy and U.S.
   Marine Corps to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative
   Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raised the notion of prevention
   of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war.^[27] This
   new strategy charted a course for the Navy, Coast Guard and Marine
   Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners
   to prevent regional crises, man-made or natural, from occurring, or
   reacting quickly should one occur to avoid negative impacts to the
   United States. During the launch of the new U.S. maritime strategy at
   the International Seapower Symposium at the U.S. Naval War College in
   2007, Coast Guard Commandant Admiral Thad Allen said the new maritime
   strategy reinforced the time-honored missions the service has carried
   out in the United States since 1790. "It reinforces the Coast Guard
   maritime strategy of safety, security and stewardship, and it reflects
   not only the global reach of our maritime services but the need to
   integrate and synchronize and act with our coalition and international
   partners to not only win wars ... but to prevent wars," Allen
   said.^[27]

Authority as a law enforcement agency[edit]

   A member of Law Enforcement Detachment (LEDET) 106 performs a security
   sweep aboard a tanker ship in the North Persian Gulf in July 2007.

   Title 14 USC, section 2 authorizes the Coast Guard to enforce federal
   law.^[28] This authority is further defined in Title 14 USC, section
   89, which gives law enforcement powers to all Coast Guard commissioned
   officers, warrant officers, and petty officers.^[29] Unlike the other
   branches of the United States Armed Forces, which are prevented from
   acting in a law enforcement capacity by Title 18 USC, section 1385, the
   Posse Comitatus Act, and Department of Defense policy, the Coast Guard
   is exempt from and not subject to the restrictions of the Posse
   Comitatus Act.^[30]

   Further law enforcement authority is given by Title 14 USC, section 143
   and Title 19 USC, section 1401, which empower U.S. Coast Guard active
   and reserve commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers
   as federal customs officers.^[31]^[32] This places them under Title 19
   USC, section 1589a, which grants customs officers general federal law
   enforcement authority, including the authority to:

   (1) carry a firearm;
   (2) execute and serve any order, warrant, subpoena, summons, or other
   process issued under the authority of the United States;
   (3) make an arrest without a warrant for any offense against the United
   States committed in the officer's presence or for a felony, cognizable
   under the laws of the United States committed outside the officer's
   presence if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the
   person to be arrested has committed or is committing a felony; and
   (4) perform any other law enforcement duty that the Secretary of
   Homeland Security may designate.

   —19 USC §1589a. Enforcement authority of customs officers^[33]

   The U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to the House of
   Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary on its 2006 Survey of
   Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities, identified
   the Coast Guard as one of 104 federal components that employed law
   enforcement officers.^[34] The report also included a summary table of
   the authorities of the Coast Guard's 192 special agents and 3,780
   maritime law enforcement boarding officers.^[35]

   Coast Guardsmen have the legal authority to carry their service-issued
   firearms on and off base. This is rarely done in practice, however; at
   many Coast Guard stations, commanders prefer to have all service-issued
   weapons in armories. Still, one court has held that Coast Guard
   boarding officers are qualified law enforcement officers authorized to
   carry personal firearms off-duty for self-defense.^[36]

History[edit]

   Main article: History of the United States Coast Guard
   Private First Class William A. McCoy and Private First Class Ralph L.
   Plunkett holding a sign thanking the U.S. Coast Guard after the Battle
   of Guam.^[37]

   The roots of the Coast Guard lie in the United States Revenue Cutter
   Service established by Alexander Hamilton under the Department of the
   Treasury on 4 August 1790. The first Coast Guard station was in
   Newburyport, Massachusetts. Until the re-establishment of the Navy in
   1798, the Revenue Cutter Service was the only naval force of the early
   United States. It was established to collect taxes from a brand new
   nation of patriot smugglers. When the officers were out at sea, they
   were told to crack down on piracy; and to rescue any mariners in
   distress.^[38]

   "First Fleet" is a term occasionally used as an informal reference to
   the Coast Guard, although there is no indication that the United States
   has ever officially used this designation with reference either to the
   Coast Guard or any element of the Navy. The informal appellation honors
   the fact that between 1790 and 1798, there was no United States Navy
   and the cutters that were the predecessors of the Coast Guard were the
   only warships protecting the coast, trade, and maritime interests of
   the new republic.^[39]

   The modern Coast Guard can be said to date to 1915, when the Revenue
   Cutter Service merged with the U.S. Life-Saving Service ^[40] when
   Congress formalized the existence of the new organization. In 1939, the
   Lighthouse Service was brought under the Coast Guard's purview. In
   1942, the Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation was transferred to
   the Coast Guard.^[41] In 1967, the Coast Guard moved from the U.S.
   Department of the Treasury to the newly formed U.S. Department of
   Transportation, an arrangement that lasted until it was placed under
   the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2002 as part of legislation
   designed to more efficiently protect American interests following the
   terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.

   In times of war, the Coast Guard or individual components of it can
   operate as a service of the Department of the Navy. This arrangement
   has a broad historical basis, as the Coast Guard has been involved in
   wars as diverse as the War of 1812, the Mexican-American War, and the
   American Civil War, in which the cutter Harriet Lane fired the first
   naval shots attempting to relieve besieged Fort Sumter. The last time
   the Coast Guard operated as a whole within the Navy was in World War
   II. More often, military and combat units within the Coast Guard will
   operate under Navy or joint operational control while other Coast Guard
   units will remain under the Department of Homeland Security.

Organization[edit]

   Main article: Organization of the United States Coast Guard
   Douglas A. Munro Coast Guard Headquarters Building in St. Elizabeths
   West Campus.

   The new Department of Homeland Security headquarters complex is being
   built on the grounds of the former St. Elizabeths Hospital in the
   Anacostia section of Southeast Washington, across the Anacostia River
   from former Coast Guard headquarters.^[42]

Shore establishments[edit]

   Shore establishment commands exist to support and facilitate the
   mission of the sea and air assets. U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters is
   located in Southwest Washington, DC. Other shore establishments are
   Coast Guard Sectors (which may include Coast Guard Bases), Coast Guard
   Stations, Coast Guard Air Stations, and the United States Coast Guard
   Yard. Training centers include the United States Coast Guard Academy,
   Training Center Petaluma, Training Center Cape May, Coast Guard
   Aviation Technical Training Center, Coast Guard Aviation Training
   Center Mobile, and Training Center Yorktown.

Personnel[edit]

   The formal name for a uniformed member of the Coast Guard is "Coast
   Guardsman", irrespective of gender. "Coastie" is an informal term
   commonly used to refer to current or former Coast Guard personnel. In
   2008, the term "Guardian" was introduced as an alternative, but was
   later dropped. Admiral Robert J. Papp, Jr. stated that it was his
   belief that no Commandant had the authority to change what members of
   the Coast Guard are called as the term Coast Guardsman is found in
   Title 14 USC which established the Coast Guard in 1915.^[43] "Team
   Coast Guard" refers to the four components of the Coast Guard as a
   whole: Regular, Reserve, Auxiliary, and Coast Guard civilian employees.

Commissioned officers[edit]

   Commissioned officers in the Coast Guard hold pay grades ranging from
   O-1 to O-10 and have the same rank structure as the Navy.^[44]^[45]
   Officers holding the rank of ensign (O-1) through lieutenant commander
   (O-4) are considered junior officers, commanders (O-5) and captains
   (O-6) are considered senior officers, and rear admirals (O-7) through
   admirals (O-10) are considered flag officers. The Commandant of the
   Coast Guard is the only member of the Coast Guard to hold the rank of
   admiral.^[44]

   The Coast Guard does not have medical officers or chaplains of its own.
   Instead, chaplains from the U.S. Navy, as well as officers from the
   U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps are assigned to the Coast
   Guard to perform chaplain-related functions and medical-related
   functions, respectively. These officers wear Coast Guard uniforms but
   replace the Coast Guard insignia with that of their own service.^[46]
   Commissioned Officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard
   Admiral

   (ADM)
   Vice Admiral

   (VADM)
   Rear Admiral

   (RADM)
   Rear Admiral
   (lower half)

   (RDML)
   Captain

   (CAPT)
   Commander

   (CDR)
   Lieutenant
   Commander

   (LCDR)
   Lieutenant

   (LT)
   Lieutenant
   (junior grade)

   (LTJG)
   Ensign

   (ENS)
   O-10 O-9 O-8 O-7 O-6 O-5 O-4 O-3 O-2 O-1
   US CG O10 insignia.svg
   US CG O9 insignia.svg
   US CG O8 insignia.svg
   US CG O7 insignia.svg
   US CG O6 insignia.svg
   US CG O5 insignia.svg
   US CG O4 insignia.svg
   US CG O3 insignia.svg
   US CG O2 insignia.svg
   US CG O1 insignia.svg

Warrant officers[edit]

   Highly qualified enlisted personnel in pay grades E-6 through E-9 with
   a minimum of eight years experience can compete each year for
   appointment as warrant officers (WO). Successful candidates are chosen
   by a board and then commissioned as chief warrant officers (CWO-2) in
   one of sixteen specialties. Over time, chief warrant officers may be
   promoted to CWO-3 and CWO-4. The ranks of warrant officer (WO-1) and
   chief warrant officer (CWO-5) are not currently used in the Coast
   Guard. Chief warrant officers may also compete for the Chief Warrant
   Officer to Lieutenant Program. If selected, the warrant officer will be
   promoted to lieutenant (O-3E). The "E" designates over four years
   active duty service as a warrant officer or enlisted member and
   entitles the member to a higher rate of pay than other lieutenants.
   Warrant Officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard
   Chief Warrant Officer 4 Chief Warrant Officer 3 Chief Warrant Officer 2
   W-4 W-3 W-2
   US CG CW4 insignia.svg
   US CG CW3 insignia.svg
   US CG CW2 insignia.svg

Enlisted personnel[edit]

   Enlisted members of the Coast Guard have pay grades from E-1 to E-9 and
   also follow the same rank structure as the Navy. Enlisted members in
   pay grades of E-4 and higher are considered petty officers and follow
   career development paths very similar to those of Navy petty officers.

   Petty officers in pay grade E-7 and higher are chief petty officers and
   must attend the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officer Academy, or an
   equivalent Department of Defense school, in order to be advanced to pay
   grade E-8. The basic themes of the school are:
     * Professionalism
     * Leadership
     * Communications
     * Systems thinking and lifelong learning

   Non-commissioned officer grade structure of the United States Coast
   Guard
   Note: Crossed anchors in the graphics indicate a rating of Boatswain's
   Mate
   Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard

   (MCPOCG)
   Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard Reserve Force or
   Area/DCO/DCMS Command Master Chief Petty Officer Command Master Chief
   Petty Officer

   (CMC)
   Master Chief Petty Officer

   (MCPO)
   Senior Chief Petty Officer

   (SCPO)
   Chief Petty Officer

   (CPO)
   Petty Officer First Class

   (PO1)
   Petty Officer Second Class

   (PO2)
   Petty Officer Third Class

   (PO3)
   E-9 E-8 E-7 E-6 E-5 E-4
   USCG MCPOCG Collar.png
   USCG MCPOCG.svg
   USCG MCPO Collar.png
   USCG MCPOCG (reserve).svg
   USCG MCPO Collar.png
   USCG CMC.svg
   USCG MCPO Collar.png
   USCG MCPO.svg
   USCG SCPO Collar.png
   USCG SCPO.svg
   USCG CPO Collar.png
   USCG CPO.svg
   CG-PO1.PNG
   USCG PO1.svg
   CG-PO2.PNG
   USCG PO2.svg
   CG-PO3.PNG
   USCG PO3.svg
   Enlisted grade structure of the United States Coast Guard
   Seaman

   (SN)
   Seaman Apprentice

   (SA)
   Seaman Recruit

   (SR)
   E-3 E-2 E-1
   USCG SM.svg
   USCG SA.svg
   USCG SR.svg

Women in the Coast Guard[edit]

   [icon] This section requires expansion. (August 2013)

   SPARS was the United States Coast Guard Women's Reserve created on 23
   November 1942 with the signing of Public Law 773 by President Franklin
   Delano Roosevelt.^[47] The name is a contraction of the Coast Guard
   motto Semper Paratus and its English translation, "Always Ready." The
   name also refers to a spar in nautical usage. Like the other women's
   reserves such as the Women's Army Corps and the WAVES, it was created
   to free men from stateside service in order to fight overseas. Its
   first director was Captain Dorothy C. Stratton who is credited with
   creating the name for the organization.^[48] The cutter USCGC Spar is
   named for the SPARS.

Training[edit]

Officer training[edit]

   The U.S. Coast Guard Academy is a four-year service academy located in
   New London, Connecticut. Approximately 225 cadets graduate each year,
   receiving a Bachelor of Science degree and a commission as an ensign in
   the Coast Guard. Graduates are obligated to serve a minimum of five
   years on active duty. Most graduates are assigned to duty aboard Coast
   Guard cutters immediately after graduation, either as Deck Watch
   Officers (DWOs) or as Engineer Officers in Training (EOITs). Smaller
   numbers are assigned directly to flight training at Naval Air Station
   Pensacola, Florida or to shore duty at Coast Guard Sector, District, or
   Area headquarters units.

   In addition to the Academy, prospective officers, who already hold a
   college degree, may enter the Coast Guard through Officer Candidate
   School (OCS), also located at the Coast Guard Academy. OCS is a
   seventeen week course of instruction that prepares candidates to serve
   effectively as officers in the Coast Guard. In addition to
   indoctrinating students into a military lifestyle, OCS provides a wide
   range of highly technical information necessary to perform the duties
   of a Coast Guard officer.

   Graduates of OCS are usually commissioned as ensigns, but some with
   advanced graduate degrees may enter as lieutenants (junior grade) or
   lieutenants. Graduating OCS officers entering active duty are required
   to serve a minimum of three years, while graduating reserve officers
   are required to serve four years. Graduates may be assigned to a
   cutter, flight training, a staff job, or an operations-ashore billet.

   OCS is the primary channel through which the Coast Guard enlisted
   grades ascend to the commissioned officer corps.

   Lawyers, engineers, intelligence officers, military aviators holding
   commissions in other branches of the U.S. Armed Forces requesting
   interservice transfers to the Coast Guard, graduates of maritime
   academies, and certain other individuals may also receive an officer's
   commission in the Coast Guard through the Direct Commission Officer
   (DCO) program. Depending on the specific program and the background of
   the individual, the course is three, four or five weeks long. The first
   week of the five-week course is an indoctrination week. The DCO program
   is designed to commission officers with highly specialized professional
   training or certain kinds of previous military experience.

   Unlike the other military services, the Coast Guard does not have a
   Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program.

Recruit training[edit]

   Newly enlisted personnel are sent to eight weeks of recruit training at
   Coast Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey. New
   recruits arrive at Sexton Hall and remain there for three days of
   initial processing which includes haircuts, shots, uniform issue, and
   other necessary entrance procedures. During this initial processing
   period, the new recruits are led by temporary company commanders. These
   temporary company commanders are tasked with teaching the new recruits
   how to march and preparing them to enter into their designated company.
   The temporary company commanders typically do not enforce any physical
   activity such as push ups or crunches. When the initial processing is
   complete, the new seaman recruits are introduced to their permanent
   company commanders who will remain with them until the end of training.
   There is typically a designated lead company commander and two support
   company commanders. The balance of the eight-week boot camp is spent in
   learning teamwork and developing physical skills. An introduction of
   how the Coast Guard operates with special emphasis on the Coast Guard's
   core values is an important part of the training.

   The current nine Recruit Training Objectives are:
     * Self-discipline
     * Military skills
     * Marksmanship
     * Vocational skills and academics
     * Military bearing
     * Physical fitness and wellness
     * Water survival and swim qualifications
     * Esprit de corps
     * Core values (Honor, Respect, and Devotion to Duty)

Service schools[edit]

   Following graduation from recruit training, most members are sent to
   their first unit while they await orders to attend advanced training in
   Class "A" Schools. At "A" schools, Coast Guard enlisted personnel are
   trained in their chosen rating; rating is a Coast Guard and Navy term
   for enlisted skills synonymous with the Army's and Marine Corps'
   military occupation codes (MOS) and Air Force's Air Force Specialty
   Code (AFSC). Members who earned high ASVAB scores or who were otherwise
   guaranteed an "A" School of choice while enlisting may go directly to
   their "A" School upon graduation from Boot Camp.

Civilian personnel[edit]

   The Coast Guard employs over 7,700 civilians in over two hundred
   different job types including Coast Guard Investigative Service special
   agents, lawyers, engineers, technicians, administrative personnel,
   tradesmen, and federal firefighters.^[49]^[50] Civilian employees work
   at various levels in the Coast Guard to support its various missions.

Equipment[edit]

   Main article: Equipment of the United States Coast Guard

Cutters[edit]

   USCGC Bertholf, the first Legend-class maritime security cutter.
   USCGC Stratton, the third Legend-class maritime security cutter.

   Originally, the U.S. Coast Guard used the term cutter in its
   traditional sense, as a type of small sailing ship. Today it officially
   uses the term for any vessel that has a permanently assigned crew and
   accommodations for the extended support of that crew, and includes only
   and all vessels of 65 feet (20 m) or more in length.^[51]
     * Polar-class icebreaker (WAGB): There are three WAGB's used for
       icebreaking and research though only two, the heavy 399-foot
       (122 m) Polar Star and the newer medium class 420-foot (130 m)
       Healy, are active.^[52]^[53]^[54]^[55] Polar Sea is located in
       Seattle, Washington but is not currently in active service.
     * National Security Cutter (WMSL): These are a new class of 418-foot
       (127 m) cutters, also known as the Legend class, intended to
       eventually replace the aging Hamilton-class high endurance cutters.
     * High Endurance Cutter (WHEC): These are 378-foot (115 m)
       Hamilton-class cutters. Missions include law enforcement, search
       and rescue, and military defense.
     * Medium Endurance Cutter (WMEC): These are mostly the 210-foot
       (64 m) Reliance class, and the 270-foot (82 m) Famous class
       cutters, although the 283-foot (86 m) Alex Haley also falls into
       this category. Primary missions are law enforcement, search and
       rescue, and military defense.
     * USCGC Mackinaw: A 240-foot (73 m) heavy icebreaker built for
       operations on the Great Lakes.
     * USCGC Eagle: A 295-foot (90 m) sailing barque used as a training
       ship for Coast Guard Academy cadets and Coast Guard officer
       candidates. She was originally built in Germany as Horst Wessel,
       and was seized by the United States as a prize of war in 1945.^[56]
     * Seagoing Buoy Tender (WLB): These 180-and-225-foot (55 and 69 m)
       ships are used to maintain aids to navigation and also assist with
       law enforcement and search and rescue.
     * Coastal Buoy Tender (WLM): The 175-foot (53 m) Keeper-class coastal
       buoy tenders are used to maintain coastal aids to navigation.
     * Sentinel class cutter (WPC): The 154-foot (47 m) Sentinel class was
       previously known as the "Fast Response Cutter" class and is used
       for search and rescue work and law enforcement.
     * Bay-class icebreaking tug (WTGB): 140-foot (43 m) icebreakers used
       primarily for domestic icebreaking missions. Other missions include
       search and rescue, law enforcement, and aids to navigation
       maintenance.^[57]
     * Patrol Boats (WPB): There are two classes of WPBs currently in
       service; the 110-foot (34 m) Island-class patrol boats and the
       87-foot (27 m) Marine Protector-class patrol boats^[58]^[59]

Aircraft[edit]

   MH-65C Dolphin in flight.
   A U.S. Coast Guard helicopter in flight
   Coast Guard HC-144A Ocean Sentry (CASA CN-235-300 MP Persuader).

   The Coast Guard operates approximately 204 fixed and rotary wing
   aircraft from 24 Coast Guard Air Stations throughout the contiguous
   United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Most of these air
   stations are tenant activities at civilian airports, several of which
   are former Air Force Bases and Naval Air Stations, although several are
   also independent military facilities. Coast Guard Air Stations are also
   located on active Naval Air Stations, Air National Guard bases, and
   Army Air Fields.

   Coast Guard aviators receive Primary (fixed-wing) and Advanced (fixed
   or rotary-wing) flight training with their Navy and Marine Corps
   counterparts at NAS Whiting Field, Florida, and NAS Corpus Christi,
   Texas, and are considered Naval Aviators. After receiving Naval Aviator
   Wings, Coast Guard pilots, with the exception of those slated to fly
   the HC-130, report to USCG Aviation Training Center Mobile, Alabama to
   receive 6–12 weeks of specialized training in the Coast Guard fleet
   aircraft they will operate. HC-130 pilots report to Little Rock AFB,
   Arkansas, for joint C-130 training under the auspices of the 314th
   Airlift Wing of the U.S. Air Force.

   Fixed-wing aircraft operate from Air Stations on long-duration
   missions. Helicopters operate from Air Stations and can deploy on a
   number of different cutters. Helicopters can rescue people or intercept
   vessels smuggling migrants or narcotics. Since the terrorist attacks of
   11 September 2001, the Coast Guard has developed a more prominent role
   in national security and now has armed helicopters operating in high
   risk areas for the purpose of maritime law enforcement and
   anti-terrorism.

   The Coast Guard is now developing an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
   program that will utilize the MQ-9 Reaper platform for homeland
   security and search/rescue operations. To support this endeavor, the
   Coast Guard has partnered with the Navy and U.S. Customs and Border
   Protection to study existing/emerging unmanned aerial system (UAS)
   capabilities within their respective organizations. As these systems
   mature, research and operational experience gleaned from this joint
   effort will enable the Coast Guard to develop its own cutter and
   land-based UAS capabilities.

   Fixed-Wing Aircraft:
     * Lockheed HC-130H Hercules^[60]
     * Lockheed HC-130J Super Hercules^[61]
     * CASA HC-144A Ocean Sentry^[62]
     * Dassault HU-25 A/C/D Guardian^[63]

   Rotary-Wing Aircraft:
     * Sikorsky HH / MH-60 J/T Jayhawk^[64]
     * Aérospatiale MH-65 C/D/E Dolphin^[65]

   Fixed-Wing VIP Transport Aircraft assigned to CGAS Washington D.C:
     * VC-37A Long Range Command and Control Aircraft (2 airframes as of
       December 2011: CG-01, S/N 653 and CG-02, S/N 638)^[66]

   USCG AC C37A in flight

Boats[edit]

   A U.S. Coast Guard 25-foot (8 m) Defender-class boat from Base Seattle

   The Coast Guard operates about 1,400 boats, defined as any vessel less
   than 65 feet (20 m) long, which generally operate near shore and on
   inland waterways.

   The Coast Guard boat fleet includes:
     * Motor Life Boat (MLB): The Coast Guard's 47-foot (14 m) primary
       heavy-weather boat used for search and rescue as well as law
       enforcement and homeland security.
     * Response Boat – Medium (RB-M): A new multi-mission 45-foot (14 m)
       vessel intended to replace the 41-foot (12 m) utility boat. 170
       planned
     * Special Purpose Craft – Near Shore Lifeboat: Only 2 built. Shallow
       draft, 42-foot (13 m) lifeboat substituted for the 47-foot (14 m)
       Motor Life Boat, based at Chatham, Massachusetts^[67]
     * Utility Boat (UTB): A 41-foot (12 m) general purpose boat used for
       nearly all Coast Guard missions.
     * Long Range Interceptor (LRI): A 36-foot (11 m) high-speed launch
       that can be launched from the stern ramps of the larger Deepwater
       cutters.
     * Aids to Navigation Boats (TANB/BUSL/ANB/ANB): Various designs
       ranging from 26 to 55 feet (7.9 to 16.8 m) used to maintain aids to
       navigation.
     * Special Purpose Craft – Law Enforcement (SPC-LE): Intended to
       operate in support of specialized law enforcement missions,
       utilizing three 300 horsepower (220 kW) Mercury Marine engines. The
       SPC-LE is 33 feet (10 m) long and capable of speeds in excess of 50
       knots (93 km/h; 58 mph) and operations more than 30 miles (48 km)
       from shore.
     * Response Boat – Small (RB-S): A 25-foot (7.6 m) high-speed boat,
       for a variety of missions, including search and rescue, port
       security and law enforcement duties.
     * Transportable Port Security Boat (TPSB): A 25-foot (7.6 m)
       well-armed boat used by Port Security Units for force protection.
     * SPC-SW Special Purpose Craft, Shallow-water: 24 feet
       (7.3 m)^[clarification needed]
     * Over-the-Horizon (OTH) boat: A 23-foot (7.0 m) rigid hull
       inflatable boat used by medium and high endurance cutters and
       specialized units.
     * Short Range Prosecutor (SRP): A 23-foot (7.0 m) rigid hull
       inflatable boat that can be launched from a stern launching ramp on
       the National Security Cutters.

Weapons[edit]

   The SIG P229R-DAK is the standard sidearm of the U.S. Coast Guard.

   The U.S. Coast Guard uses a wide variety of small arms. Handguns,
   shotguns, and rifles are used to arm boat crew and boarding team
   members and machine guns are mounted aboard cutters, boats, and
   helicopters.

   Common small arms include:
     * SIG Sauer P229R DAK .40 S&W pistol
     * Remington M870P 12 gauge shotgun
     * M16A2 rifle
     * M4 carbine
     * M14 Tactical rifle
     * FN M240 machine gun
     * M2 heavy machine gun

   Units within the Deployable Operations Group also employ specialized
   weapons including the Mk 18 carbine, Mk 11 precision rifle, and M203
   grenade launcher. Marksmen from the Helicopter Interdiction Tactical
   Squadron and Law Enforcement Detachments use a variant of the Barrett
   M107 .50-caliber rifle to disable the engines on fleeing boats.

Symbols[edit]

Core values[edit]

   The Coast Guard, like the other armed services of the United States,
   has a set of core values that serve as basic ethical guidelines for all
   Coast Guard active duty, reservists, auxiliarists, and civilians. The
   Coast Guard Core Values are:

   Honor: Integrity is our standard. We demonstrate uncompromising ethical
   conduct and moral behavior in all of our personal actions. We are loyal
   and accountable to the public trust.
   Respect: We value our diverse workforce. We treat each other with
   fairness, dignity and compassion. We encourage individual opportunity
   and growth. We encourage creativity through empowerment. We work as a
   team.
   Devotion to Duty: We are professionals, military and civilian, who seek
   responsibility, accept accountability, and are committed to the
   successful achievement of our organizational goals. We exist to serve.
   We serve with pride.

   —Coast Guard Core Values^[68]

The Guardian Ethos[edit]

   In 2008, the Coast Guard introduced the Guardian Ethos. As the
   Commandant, Admiral Allen noted in a message to all members of the
   Coast Guard: "[T]he Ethos ... defines the essence of the Coast Guard
   and could be viewed as the contract the Coast Guard and its members
   make with the nation and its citizens.^[69] The Ethos was as follows:

   I am America's Maritime Guardian.
   I serve the citizens of the United States.
   I will protect them.
   I will defend them.
   I will save them.
   I am their Shield.
   For them I am Semper Paratus.
   I live the Coast Guard Core Values.
   I am a Guardian.
   We are the United States Coast Guard.

   —The Guardian Ethos^[70]

The Coast Guard Ethos[edit]

   In an ALCOAST message effective 1 December 2011 the Commandant, Admiral
   Papp, directed that the language of Guardian Ethos be superseded by the
   Coast Guard Ethos in an effort to use terminology that would help with
   the identity of personnel serving in the Coast Guard. The term Coast
   Guardsman is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is
   the form that has been used historically.

   I am a Coast Guardsman.
   I serve the people of the United States.
   I will protect them.
   I will defend them.
   I will save them.
   I am their shield.
   For them I am Semper Paratus.
   I live the Coast Guard core values.
   I am proud to be a Coast Guardsman.
   We are the United States Coast Guard.

   —The Coast Guard Ethos^[71]

Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman[edit]

   The "Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman" was written by Vice
   Admiral Harry G. Hamlet, who served as Commandant of the Coast Guard
   from 1932 to 1936.^[72]

   I am proud to be a United States Coast Guardsman.
   I revere that long line of expert seamen who by their devotion to duty
   and sacrifice of self have made it possible for me to be a member of a
   service honored and respected, in peace and in war, throughout the
   world.
   I never, by word or deed, will bring reproach upon the fair name of my
   service, nor permit others to do so unchallenged.
   I will cheerfully and willingly obey all lawful orders.
   I will always be on time to relieve, and shall endeavor to do more,
   rather than less, than my share.
   I will always be at my station, alert and attending to my duties.
   I shall, so far as I am able, bring to my seniors solutions, not
   problems.
   I shall live joyously, but always with due regard for the rights and
   privileges of others.
   I shall endeavor to be a model citizen in the community in which I
   live.
   I shall sell life dearly to an enemy of my country, but give it freely
   to rescue those in peril.
   With God’s help, I shall endeavor to be one of His noblest Works...
   A UNITED STATES COAST GUARDSMAN.

   —Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman^[73]

"You have to go out, but you don't have to come back!"[edit]

   This unofficial motto of the Coast Guard dates to an 1899 United States
   Lifesaving Service regulation, which states in part: "In attempting a
   rescue, ... he will not desist from his efforts until by actual trial,
   the impossibility of effecting a rescue is demonstrated. The statement
   of the keeper that he did not try to use the boat because the sea or
   surf was too heavy will not be accepted, unless attempts to launch it
   were actually made and failed."^[74] The regulation was silent as to
   what happens to the rescuer if the attempt fails.

Coast Guard Ensign[edit]

   Ensign of the United States Coast Guard
   Former Coast Guard Ensign, used from 1915 to 1953.

   The Coast Guard Ensign (flag) was first flown by the Revenue Cutter
   Service in 1799 to distinguish revenue cutters from merchant ships. A 1
   August 1799 order issued by Secretary of the Treasury, Oliver Wolcott,
   Jr. specified that the Ensign would be "sixteen perpendicular stripes
   (for the number of states in the United States at the time), alternate
   red and white, the union of the ensign to be the arms of the United
   States in a dark blue on a white field."^[75]

   This ensign became familiar in American waters and served as the sign
   of authority for the Revenue Cutter Service until the early 20th
   century. The ensign was originally intended to be flown only on revenue
   cutters and boats connected with the Customs Service but over the years
   it was found flying atop custom houses as well, and the practice became
   a requirement in 1874. On 7 June 1910, President William Howard Taft
   issued an Executive Order adding an emblem to (or "defacing") the
   ensign flown by the Revenue cutters to distinguish it from what is now
   called the Customs Ensign flown from the custom houses. The emblem was
   changed to the official seal of the Coast Guard in 1927.^[76]^[77]

   The purpose of the ensign is to allow ship captains to easily recognize
   those vessels having legal authority to stop and board them. It is
   flown only as a symbol of law enforcement authority and is never
   carried as a parade standard.^[78]

Coast Guard Standard[edit]

   Parade Standard of the U.S. Coast Guard.

   The Coast Guard Standard is used in parades and carries the battle
   honors of the Coast Guard. It was derived from the jack of the Coast
   Guard ensign which was flown by revenue cutters. The emblem is a blue
   eagle from the coat of arms of the United States on a white field.
   Above the eagle are the words "UNITED STATES COAST GUARD" below the
   eagle is the motto, "SEMPER PARATUS" and the inscription "1790."

Service Mark ("Racing Stripe")[edit]

   Service Mark (also known as Racing Stripe).

   The racing stripe is borne by Coast Guard cutters, aircraft, and many
   boats. Red-hulled icebreaker cutters and most HH-65/MH-65 helicopters
   (i.e., those with a red fuselage) bear a narrow white bar, a narrow
   blue bar, and broad white bar, with the Coast Guard shield centered.
   Conversely, black-hulled cutters (such as buoy tenders and inland
   construction tenders) use the standard racing stripe. Auxiliary vessels
   maintained by the Coast Guard also carry the Racing Stripe, but in
   inverted colors (i.e., broad blue stripe with narrow white and CG red
   stripes) and the Auxiliary shield.

   The Racing Stripe, officially known as the Service Mark, was designed
   in 1964 by the industrial design office of Raymond Loewy Associates to
   give the Coast Guard a distinctive, modern image. Loewy had designed
   the colors for the Air Force One fleet for Jackie Kennedy. President
   Kennedy was so impressed with his work, he suggested that the entire
   Federal Government needed his make-over and suggested that he start
   with the Coast Guard.^[79] First used in 1967, it consists of a narrow
   blue stripe, a narrow white stripe between, and a broad CG red bar with
   the Coast Guard shield centered.^[10]^[80]^[81] The stripes are canted
   at a 64 degree angle, coincidentally the year the Racing Stripe was
   designed.^[82]

   Similar Racing Stripe designs have been adopted for the use of other
   coast guards and maritime authorities and many other law enforcement
   and rescue agencies.

Semper Paratus[edit]

   The official march of the Coast Guard is "Semper Paratus" (Latin for
   "Always Ready").^[83]

Colors[edit]

   Two Pantone colors are named after the Coast Guard; they are used in
   the Service Mark.^[10]
     * CG Red is Pantone 179C (hex color code #E23D28)
     * CG Blue is Pantone 307C^[10] (hex color code #007AA5)^[84]

Uniforms[edit]

   Photo showing a variety of Coast Guard uniforms. From Left: Service
   Dress White, Tropical Blue, Service Dress Blue, Winter Dress Blue,
   Camouflage Utility Uniform, Operational Dress Uniform

   Prior to 1972, Coast Guard personnel wore the same uniforms as the Navy
   with distinctive Coast Guard insignia, primarily distinctive cap
   devices for officers and chief petty officers, incorporation of the
   Coast Guard shield in lieu of line or staff corps insignia for
   officers, and different buttons on dress uniforms.

   In 1972, the current Coast Guard Service Dress Blue (SDB) uniform was
   introduced for wear by both officers and enlisted personnel; the
   transition was completed during 1974. The uniform consists of a blue
   four-pocket single breasted jacket and trousers. A light-blue button-up
   shirt with a pointed collar, two front button-flap pockets, and
   shoulder loops, along with a tie of the same shade as the jacket are
   worn with the uniform. Officer rank insignia parallels that of the Navy
   but with the gold Navy line star replaced with the gold Coast Guard
   Shield and with the Navy blue background color replaced by Coast Guard
   blue. Enlisted rank insignia is also similar to the Navy with the Coast
   Guard shield replacing the eagle on collar and cap devices. Group Rate
   marks (stripes) for junior enlisted members (E-3 and below) also follow
   Navy convention with white for seaman, red for fireman, and green for
   airman. In a departure from the Navy conventions, all petty officers
   E-6 and below wear red chevrons and all chief petty officers wear gold.
   Unlike the Navy, there are no khaki uniforms, and all personnel wear
   the same color uniform.^[85]
   A Coast Guard warrant officer (left) and officer (right) wearing Full
   Dress Whites.

   The SDB uniform may be worn year-round for business within the Coast
   Guard and for social occasions where the civilian equivalent is coat
   and tie.^[86]

   The Tropical Blue variation, worn in warm weather, omits the jacket and
   tie, and features a short sleeve shirt with rank insignia on shoulder
   boards for officers, and pin-on collar insignia for petty officers. The
   Tropical Blue uniform may be worn year-round for general office wear
   and for visits between commands. It may be worn in lieu of the SDB
   uniform, but not to functions where civilian dress is coat and
   tie.^[86]

   Coast Guard officers also have dress white uniforms, nearly identical
   to the choker white uniforms worn by naval officers (aside from
   service-specific buttons, insignia and sword design), typically used
   for formal parade and change-of-command ceremonies. For similar
   occasions enlisted members wear Tropical Blue, Service Dress Blue, or
   Full Dress Blue. Full Dress Blue replaces the light blue shirt with a
   white shirt, and full size medals are worn on the jacket. A white belt
   may be worn for honor guards. Mess dress uniforms are worn by members
   for formal (black tie) evening ceremonies. Like the officers' dress
   white uniforms, the mess dress uniforms are identical to those of the
   Navy, aside from Coast Guard-specific insignia.
   The U.S. Coast Guard Pipe Band in New York during the 2010 Thanksgiving
   parade.

   The current working uniform of the Coast Guard is the Operational Dress
   Uniform (ODU). The ODU may be worn year-round primarily as a field
   utility and watchstanding uniform, and may be worn in an office
   environment. The ODU is similar to the Battle Dress Uniform of other
   armed services, both in function and style. However, the ODU is in a
   solid dark blue with no camouflage pattern and does not have lower
   pockets on the blouse. The first generation ODU, wearable until 1 July
   2012 was worn tucked in. The second generation ODU is worn untucked and
   has black Coast Guard insignia embroidered on the left shirt pocket as
   well as the side pockets of the trousers. The ODU is worn with
   composite-toed boots in most circumstances, but low-cut brown boat
   shoes may be prescribed for certain vessel boarding operations. A
   standard baseball-style ball cap is worn, embroidered in gold block
   lettering with "U.S. Coast Guard." Units may also additionally
   authorize ball caps with the unit name embroidered for wear while on
   the unit. A foul weather parka is the outerwear worn with the ODU. The
   former dark blue working uniform has been withdrawn from use by the
   Coast Guard but may be worn by Auxiliarists until no longer
   serviceable.

   Coast Guard personnel serving in expeditionary combat units such as
   Port Security Units, Law Enforcement Detachments, and others, wear the
   Camouflage Utility Uniform (CUU) with the woodland or desert
   pattern/color scheme based on the operational commander's guidance. An
   eight-point cap is worn with rank insignia. The camouflaged utility sun
   hat may be worn when prescribed by the operational commander, without
   rank insignia.
   Coast Guard cadets wearing fall Parade Dress Blue uniform dress their
   line.

   All Coast Guardsmen wear the combination cap with all uniforms except
   the ODU and CUU. Company commanders (the Coast Guard's equivalent of
   drill sergeants) at Training Center Cape May wear the traditional
   Smokey Bear-style campaign hat.

   The Coast Guard Pipe Band, a special musical unit composed of active,
   reserve and auxiliary coast guardsmen, wears a modified form of
   highland dress, including kilt and sporran. It is, along with the Band
   of the Air Force Reserve Pipe Band, one of only two kilted unit in the
   United States military, excluding those maintained by state defense
   forces and service academies. The band's kilt is patterned in the
   official U.S. Coast Guard tartan.

   Cadets at the U.S. Coast Guard Academy have access to standard Coast
   Guard uniforms, including Service Dress Blues and the ODU, however,
   also wear two different styles of parade dress uniforms. Fall Parade
   Dress Blue consists of navy blouses with banded collars and double rows
   of buttons, worn with matching navy trousers and a white peaked hat.
   Spring Parade Dress Blue substitutes white trousers in lieu of navy.

Issues[edit]

   The Coast Guard faces several issues in the near future.

   Lack of coverage affects many areas with high maritime traffic. For
   example, local officials in Scituate, Massachusetts, have complained
   that there is no permanent Coast Guard station, and the presence of the
   Coast Guard in winter is vital. One reason for this lack of coverage is
   the relatively high cost of building storm-proof buildings on coastal
   property; the Cape Hatteras station was abandoned in 2005 after winter
   storms wiped out the 12-foot (3.7 m) sand dune serving as its
   protection from the ocean. Faced with these issues the Coast Guard has
   contracted with General Dynamics C4 System to provide a complete
   replacement of their 1970s era radio equipment. Rescue 21 is the United
   States Coast Guard's advanced command, control and communications
   system. Created to improve the ability to assist mariners in distress
   and save lives and property at sea, the system is currently being
   installed in stages across the United States. The nation's existing
   maritime search and rescue (SAR) communications system has been in
   operation since the early 1970s. Difficult to maintain, increasingly
   unreliable and prone to coverage gaps, this system no longer meets the
   safety needs of America's growing marine traffic. In addition, it is
   incapable of supporting the Coast Guard's new mission requirements for
   homeland security, which require close cooperation with Department of
   Defense agencies as well as federal, state and local law enforcement
   authorities. Modernizing this system enhances the safety and protection
   of America's waterways.

   Lack of strength to meet its assigned missions is being met by a
   legislated increase in authorized strength from 39,000 to 45,000. In
   addition, the volunteer Auxiliary acts as an air and surface resource
   in support of a variety of missions conducted by Coast Guard units.

   Aging vessels is another problem, with the Coast Guard still operating
   some of the oldest naval vessels in the world. In 2005, the Coast Guard
   terminated contracts to upgrade the 110-foot (34 m) Island-class
   cutters to 123-foot (37 m) cutters because of warping and distortion of
   the hulls. In late 2006, Admiral Thad Allen, Commandant of the Coast
   Guard, decommissioned all eight of the modified cutters due to
   dangerous conditions created by the lengthening of the hull - to
   include compromised watertight integrity. The Coast Guard has, as a
   result of the failed conversion, revised production schedules for the
   Fast Response Cutter (FRC). Of the world's 40 largest navies and coast
   guards, the U.S. Coast Guard has the 38th oldest surface fleet.^[87]

   Live fire exercises by Coast Guard boat and cutter crews in U.S. waters
   of the Great Lakes was proposed in 2006 and attracted attention in the
   U.S. and Canada. The Coast Guard had proposed the establishment of 34
   locations around the Great Lakes where live fire training using
   vessel-mounted machine guns were to be conducted periodically
   throughout the year. The Coast Guard said that these exercises are a
   critical part of proper crew training in support of the service's
   multiple missions on the Great Lakes, including law enforcement and
   anti-terrorism. Those who raised concerns about the firing exercises
   commented about safety concerns and that the impact on commercial
   shipping, tourism, recreational boating and the environment may be
   greater than what the Coast Guard had stated. The Coast Guard took
   public comment and conducted a series of nine public meetings on this
   issue. After receiving more than 1,000 comments, mostly opposing the
   Coast Guard's plan, the Coast Guard announced that they were
   withdrawing their proposal for target practice on the Great Lakes,
   although a revised proposal may be made in the
   future.^[88]^[89]^[90]^[91]^[92]

Deployable Operations Group[edit]

   Main article: Deployable Operations Group
   United States Coast Guard Reserve

   The Deployable Operations Group (DOG) was a Coast Guard command
   established in July 2007. The DOG established a single command
   authority to rapidly provide the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland
   Security, Department of Defense, Department of Justice and other
   interagency operational commanders adaptive force packages drawn from
   the Coast Guard's deployable specialized force units. The DOG was
   disbanded in April 2013 and its deployable specialized forces (DSF)
   units were placed under the control of area commanders.^[93]

   The planning for the unit began after the terrorist attacks of 11
   September 2001, and culminated with its formation on 20 July 2007. Its
   missions include maritime law enforcement, anti-terrorism, port
   security, pollution response, and diving operations.

   There were over 25 specialized units within the Deployable Operations
   Group including the Maritime Security Response Team, Maritime Safety
   and Security Teams, Law Enforcement Detachments, Port Security Units,
   the National Strike Force, and Regional Dive Lockers. The DOG also
   managed Coast Guard personnel assigned to the Navy Expeditionary Combat
   Command and was involved in the selection of Coast Guard candidates to
   attend Navy BUD/S and serve with Navy SEAL Teams.^[94]

Coast Guard Reserve[edit]

   Main article: United States Coast Guard Reserve
   United States Coast Guard Reserve

   The United States Coast Guard Reserve is the reserve military force of
   the Coast Guard.^[95] The Coast Guard Reserve was founded on 19
   February 1941. Coast Guard reservists normally drill two days a month
   and an additional 12 days of active duty each year, although many
   perform additional drill and active duty periods, to include those
   mobilized to extended active duty. Coast Guard reservists possess the
   same training and qualifications as their active duty counterparts, and
   as such, can be found augmenting active duty Coast Guard units every
   day.

   During the Vietnam War and shortly thereafter, the Coast Guard
   considered abandoning the reserve program, but the force was instead
   reoriented into force augmentation, where its principal focus was not
   just reserve operations, but to add to the readiness and mission
   execution of every-day active duty personnel.

   Since 11 September 2001, over 8,500 reservists have been activated and
   served on tours of active duty, to include deployments to the Persian
   Gulf and also as parts of Department of Defense combatant commands such
   as the U.S. Northern and Central Commands. Coast Guard Port Security
   Units are entirely staffed with reservists, except for five to seven
   active duty personnel. Additionally, most of the staffing the Coast
   Guard provides to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command are reservists.

   The Reserve is managed by the Acting Director of Reserve and Leadership
   (CG-13), Rear Admiral David R. Callahan.

Coast Guard Auxiliary[edit]

   Main article: United States Coast Guard Auxiliary
   AUX W.svg

   The United States Coast Guard Auxiliary is the uniformed volunteer
   component of the Coast Guard, established on 23 June 1939 by an act of
   Congress as the United States Coast Guard Reserve, it was re-designated
   as the Auxiliary on 19 February 1941. It works within the Coast Guard
   in carrying out its noncombatant and non-law enforcement missions.^[96]
   Auxiliarists are subject to direction from the Commandant of the Coast
   Guard making them unique among all federal volunteers (e.g. Air Force's
   Civil Air Patrol and FBI's InfraGard). As of 2012, there were
   approximately 32,000 active Auxiliarists.^[2] The Coast Guard has
   assigned primary responsibility for many recreational boating safety
   tasks to the Auxiliary, including public boating safety education and
   voluntary vessel safety checks called Courtesy Marine Examinations and
   Personal Watercraft Safety Checks.^[97]

   Prior to 1997, Auxiliarists were limited to those tasks and on-water
   patrols supporting recreational boating safety. In 1997, however, new
   legislation authorized the Auxiliary to participate in any and all
   Coast Guard missions except direct military and direct law
   enforcement.^[98] Auxiliarists may support the law enforcement mission
   of the Coast Guard but may not directly participate in it, and
   Auxiliarists and their vessels are not permitted to carry a weapon
   while serving in any Auxiliary capacity. Auxiliarists use their own
   vessel (e.g., boats, aircraft, and vehicles), once it is registered as
   a Coast Guard Facility, in Coast Guard missions.

Medals and honors[edit]

   Main article: Awards and decorations of the United States Coast Guard
   See also: Awards and decorations of the United States military

   One Coast Guardsman, Douglas Albert Munro, has earned the Medal of
   Honor, the highest military award of the United States.^[99] Fifty five
   Coast Guardsmen have earned the Navy Cross and numerous men and women
   have earned the Distinguished Flying Cross.

   The highest peacetime decoration awarded within the Coast Guard is the
   Homeland Security Distinguished Service Medal; prior to the transfer of
   the Coast Guard to the Department of Homeland Security, the highest
   peacetime decoration was the Department of Transportation Distinguished
   Service Medal. The highest unit award available is the Presidential
   Unit Citation.

   In wartime, members of the Coast Guard are eligible to receive the Navy
   version of the Medal of Honor. A Coast Guard Medal of Honor is
   authorized but has not yet been developed or issued.

   In May 2006, at the Change of Command ceremony when Admiral Thad Allen
   took over as Commandant, President George W. Bush awarded the entire
   Coast Guard, including the Coast Guard Auxiliary, the Coast Guard
   Presidential Unit Citation with hurricane device, for its efforts
   during and after Hurrican Katrina and Tropical Storm Rita.

Organizations[edit]

Coast Guard Aviation Association[edit]

   Those who have piloted or flown in Coast Guard aircraft under official
   flight orders may join the Coast Guard Aviation Association which was
   formerly known as the "Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl" ("Flying Since
   the World was Flat").

   The Ancient Albatross Award is presented to the active duty USCG member
   who qualified as an aviator earlier than any other person who is still
   serving. Separate enlisted and officer awards are given.^[100]^[101]

Coast Guard CW Operators Association[edit]

   The Coast Guard CW Operators Association (CGCWOA) is a membership
   organization comprising primarily former members of the United States
   Coast Guard who held the enlisted rating of Radioman (RM) or
   Telecommunications Specialist (TC), and who employed International
   Morse Code (CW) in their routine communications duties on Coast Guard
   cutters and at shore stations.^[102]

USCG Chief Petty Officers Association[edit]

   Members of this organization unite to assist members and dependents in
   need, assist with Coast Guard recruiting efforts, support the aims and
   goals of the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Academy, keep informed on
   Coast Guard matters, and assemble for social amenities; and include
   Chief, Senior Chief, and Master Chief Petty Officers, active, reserve
   and retired. Membership is also open to all Chief Warrant Officers and
   Officers who have served as a Chief Petty Officer.^[103]

USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association (CWOA)[edit]

   Established in 1929, the Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers
   Association, United States Coast Guard (CWOA) represents Coast Guard
   warrant and chief warrant officers (active, reserve and retired) to the
   Congress, White House and the Department of Homeland Security.
   Additionally, the association communicates with the Coast Guard
   leadership on matters of concern to Coast Guard chief warrant
   officers.^[104]

Notable Coast Guardsmen[edit]

   Main article: List of U.S. Coast Guard people

   Numerous celebrities have served in the Coast Guard including tennis
   player Jack Kramer, golfer Arnold Palmer, All Star baseball player Sid
   Gordon, boxer Jack Dempsey; musicians Kai Winding, Rudy Vallee,^[105]
   Derroll Adams, and Tom Waits; actors Buddy Ebsen, Sid Caesar, Victor
   Mature, Richard Cromwell, Alan Hale, Jr., William Hopper, Beau Bridges,
   Cesar Romero; author Alex Haley; and Senator Claiborne Pell.

   Vice Admiral Thad Allen in 2005 was named Principal Federal Officer to
   oversee recovery efforts in the Gulf Region after Hurricane Katrina.
   After promotion to Admiral, on the eve of his retirement as Commandant,
   Allen again received national visibility after being named National
   Incident Commander overseeing the response efforts of the Deepwater
   Horizon oil spill.

   Former Coast Guard officers have been appointed to numerous civilian
   government offices. After retiring as Commandant of the Coast Guard in
   2002, Admiral James Loy went on to serve as administrator of the
   Transportation Security Administration and later as Deputy Secretary of
   the Department of Homeland Security. Admiral Loy was by no means the
   only Coast Guard officer who was later appointed to a civilian
   government position; following his Coast Guard career, Carlton Skinner
   served as the first Civilian Governor of Guam; G. William Miller, 65th
   Secretary of the Treasury was a graduate of the Coast Guard Academy,
   and retired Vice Admiral Harvey E. Johnson, Jr. served as Deputy
   Administrator and Chief Operating Officer of the Federal Emergency
   Management Agency (FEMA) under President George W. Bush. Rear Admiral
   Stephen W. Rochon was appointed by President George W. Bush to serve as
   the Director of the Executive Residence and White House Chief Usher,
   beginning service on 12 March 2007, and continues to serve in the same
   capacity under President Barack Obama.

   Two Coast Guard aviators, Commander Bruce E. Melnick and Captain Daniel
   C. Burbank, have served as NASA astronauts.

   Signalman First Class Douglas Albert Munro was awarded the Medal of
   Honor posthumously, and is the only Coast Guardsman to ever receive
   this honor.^[99]

In popular culture[edit]

In video games[edit]

     * The 2005 survival horror video game, Cold Fear, depicts a Coast
       Guardsman investigating paranormal events aboard a Russian whaling
       ship, and an oil rig later in the game.
     * Flight Simulator X: Acceleration features an EH101 in U.S. Coast
       Guard colors. However, the USCG does not operate these aircraft.
     * The U.S. Coast Guard appears as gameplay adversaries in Jaws
       Unleashed, including cutters and helicopters.
     * Deadliest Catch: Alaskan Storm features the U.S. Coast Guard.

In literature[edit]

     * A Coast Guard cutter and its commanding officer and crew figured
       prominently in Tom Clancy's books Clear and Present Danger, Without
       Remorse, and Executive Orders.
     * Sinbad, a dog serving aboard the cutter USCGC Campbell in WWII, who
       was enlisted and held the rank of Chief Petty Officer, was the
       first member of the United States Coast Guard to be the subject of
       a biography in George Foley's Sinbad of the Coast Guard in 1945.
     * The Coast Guard training cutter, USCGC Eagle, figures prominently
       in S.M. Stirling's book Island in the Sea of Time.

In film[edit]

     * Fighting Coast Guard, a 1951 drama, depicts Coast Guard trained to
       help win WWII.
     * Onionhead, a 1957 comedy, portrayes Andy Griffith as a Coast Guard
       recruit.
     * Thunderball (1965), involves James Bond played by Sean Connery
       being hoisted by an HH-52 Seaguard.
     * Assault on a Queen, a 1966 film starring Frank Sinatra and Verna
       Lisi, featured USCGC Androscoggin.
     * The Boatniks, a 1970 Disney comedy film, depicts Ensign Tom
       Garland, played by Robert Morse, as the commander of a small cutter
       on the West Coast.
     * Satan's Triangle, a 1975 TV movie, involves a United States Coast
       Guard helicopter sent to answer a distress call from inside the
       Bermuda Triangle.
     * The Last Flight of Noah's Ark, a 1976 Walt Disney movie. Elliot
       Gould and crew towed home in B-29 Fuselage boat by a Coast Guard
       cutter.
     * The Island (1980 film)|The Island (1980). Latter-day Caribbean
       pirates capture the (fictional) Coast Guard cutter USCGC New Hope.
       Filming was on USCGC Dauntless.
     * Splash (1986). Coast Guard (fake) helicopters drop Coast Guard
       divers into New York Harbor.
     * Top Gun, Maverick and Goose's body are pulled from the ocean by a
       Coast Guard HH-3F Pelican.
     * Overboard, 1987 comedy, features a Coast Guard cutter and crew
       intercepting a private yacht.
     * Licence to Kill, 1989, James Bond captures a drug dealer while
       flying in a Coast Guard HH-65 Dolphin in Florida.
     * Clear and Present Danger, a 1994 film, in which a Coast Guard
       cutter intercepts a drug- running ship
     * The Perfect Storm, 2000 film, depicted the rescue operations of the
       USCGC Tamaroa as one of its subplots.
     * Bad Boys II, 2003 film, depicts counter-drug helicopters from the
       Helicopter Interdiction Tactical Squadron (HITRON).
     * Yours, Mine, and Ours, 2005 family comedy, Dennis Quaid plays a
       fictional U.S. Coast Guard Academy superintendent who marries a
       character played by Rene Russo; together, they have 18 children.
     * The Guardian, 2006 film, starring Kevin Costner and Ashton Kutcher,
       was based on the training and operations of Coast Guard Aviation
       Survival Technicians.
     * Pain & Gain, 2013 film, starring Dwayne Johnson and Mark Wahlberg,
       depicted the Coast Guard Deployable Operations Group in action.

In television[edit]

   The Coast Guard has been featured in several television series,
   including Baywatch, CSI: Miami, NCIS, Deadliest Catch, Dirty Jobs,
   Harbor Command, "Burn Notice" and Miami Vice.
     * Sea Hunt, Coast Guard involved in several episodes.
     * Flipper, various Coast Guard HH-52 Seaguard helicopters were used.
     * Gilligans Island, the passengers and crew were all rescued by the
       Coast Guard.
     * Emergency!, Coast Guard HH-52 Seaguard helicopters and boats were
       used in various rescues.
     * Boston Legal, the characters of Alan Shore and Denny Crane,
       portrayed by James Spader and William Shatner, respectively, join
       the Coast Guard Auxiliary.
     * Coast Guard was a syndicated television series that aired for three
       seasons from 1995 to 1997 in the United States as well as overseas,
       where it was called Sea Rescue. The series followed Coast Guard
       personnel as they performed their missions.^[106]^[107]^[108]
     * Cartoon character Popeye was in the Coast Guard after being a
       Merchant Mariner. He later joined the Navy.
     * Unnamed Coast Guardsmen of a Law Enforcement Detachment were
       featured in a Channel 5 documentary Royal Navy Caribbean Patrol.
       They were serving aboard HMS Manchester, a British Royal Navy ship
       combating drug smugglers in the Caribbean.
     * Coast Guard Alaska: Search and Rescue, a series on The Weather
       Channel that features a Coast Guard search-and-rescue unit based in
       Kodiak, Alaska.
     * Coast Guard Florida: Search and Rescue, a series in production on
       The Weather Channel that features Coast Guard search-and-rescue
       units based in Miami and Clearwater, Florida.

See also[edit]

   Portal icon United States portal
   Portal icon Military of the United States portal
   Portal icon United States Coast Guard portal
   Portal icon Law enforcement/Law enforcement topics portal

Coast Guard[edit]

     * AMVER
     * Chaplain of the Coast Guard
     * Coast Guard Day
     * Joint Maritime Training Center
     * List of United States Coast Guard cutters
     * Maritime Law Enforcement Academy
     * MARSEC
     * National Data Buoy Center
     * National Ice Center
     * North Pacific Coast Guard Agencies Forum
     * Patrol Forces Southwest Asia
     * U.S. Coast Guard Legal Division
     * U.S. Coast Guard Intelligence
     * United States Coast Guard Police
     * United States Coast Guard Air Stations
     * United States Coast Guard Stations
     * United States Coast Guard officer rank insignia
     * United States Coast Guard Research & Development Center

Related agencies[edit]

     * List of United States federal law enforcement agencies
     * National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office
       for Law Enforcement
     * U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
     * U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
     * U.S. Marine Corps
     * U.S. Maritime Administration
     * U.S. Merchant Marine

Notes[edit]

   Footnotes

    1. ^ Prior to the formation of the U.S. Coast Guard by merger of the
       U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the U.S. Life-Saving Service in
       1915, the Revenue Cutter Service had been under the control of the
       U.S. Department of the Treasury from its creation in 1790. The U.S.
       Life-Saving Service dated from 1871 and was also under the control
       of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.

   References

    1. ^ "When was the Coast Guard established?". Coast Guard History:
       Frequently Asked Questions. Coast Guard Historian's Office. 13 July
       2013.
    2. ^ ^a ^b ^c "Coast Guard Snapshot 2012" (PDF). United States Coast
       Guard. Retrieved 3 February 2013.
    3. ^ "Homeland Security Budget-in-Brief Fiscal Year 2009" (PDF).
       United States Department of Homeland Security. 2009. p. 53.
    4. ^ ^a ^b ^c United States Coast Guard. "Daily Chronology of Coast
       Guard History". United States Department of Homeland Security.
       "2003 - Administrative control of the Coast Guard transferred to
       the newly created Department of Homeland Security from the
       Department of Transportation, where it had served since 1 April
       1967."
    5. ^ United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard
       Organizational History". United States Department of Homeland
       Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "1 April 1967: Executive Order
       16781 transferred the Coast Guard from the Treasury Department to
       the newly-formed Department of Transportation."
    6. ^ ^a ^b United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard
       Organizational History". United States Department of Homeland
       Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "1 November 1941: President
       Roosevelt's Executive Order 8929 transferred the Coast Guard to
       Navy Department control. In compliance with Executive Order 9666,
       the Coast Guard returned to Treasury Department control."
    7. ^ United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard
       Organizational History". United States Department of Homeland
       Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "28 August 1919: Coast Guard
       reverted to Treasury Department after President Wilson signed
       Executive Order 3160."
    8. ^ ^a ^b United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard
       Organizational History". United States Department of Homeland
       Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "6 April 1917: With the
       declaration of war against Germany the Coast Guard was transferred
       by Executive Order to the control of the Navy Department."
    9. ^ "An Act To create the Coast Guard by combining therein the
       existing Life-Saving Service and Revenue-Cutter Service". January
       1915. Retrieved 8 September 2013. "Be it enacted by the Senate and
       House of Representatives o the United States of America in Congress
       assembled, That there shall be established in lieu of the existing
       Revenue-Cutter Service and the Life-Saving Service, to be composed
       of those two existing organizations, with the existing offices and
       positions and the incumbent officers and men of those two services,
       the Coast Guard, which shall constitute a part of the military
       forces of the United States and which shall operate under the
       Treasury Department in time of peace and operate as a part of the
       Navy, subject to the orders of the Secretary of the Navy, in time
       of war or when the President shall so direct. When subject to the
       Secretary of the Navy in time of war the expense of the Coast Guard
       shall be paid by the Navy Department; Provided, That no provision
       of this Act shall be construed as giving any officer of either the
       Coast Guard or the Navy, military or other control at any time over
       any vessel, officer, or man of the other service except by
       direction of the President."
   10. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d "U.S. Coast Guard Heraldry" (PDF). United States
       Coast Guard. April 2011. pp. 3–1. COMDTINST M5200.14A.
   11. ^ Johnson, Robert Irwin (1987). Guardians of the Sea, History of
       the United States Coast Guard, 1915 to the Present. Annapolis,
       Maryland: Naval Institute Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-87021-720-3.
   12. ^ Scheina, Robert (11 October 2012). "The U.S. Coast Guard at War".
       Coast Guard Historian's Office.
   13. ^ LaRouche, Monique (2012). "The Coast Guard RAIDs Afghanistan".
       Reservist (U.S. Coast Guard) LXI (1): 18.
   14. ^ "Coast Guard Organization and Administration, Chapter One".
       Retrieved 7 October 2013.
   15. ^ Stone, Andrea (21 December 2011). "Coast Guard Cutters Rust Away,
       Break Down". The Huffington Post.
   16. ^ The Coast Guard Gets It Right Amanda Ripley. TIME. 23 October
       2005.
   17. ^ 6 U.S.C. § 468
   18. ^ http://www.uscg.mil/hq/g-o/g-opr/nsarc/nsarc.htm
   19. ^ "National Search and Rescue Plan (USA) 2007". Uscg.mil.
       2012-06-22. Retrieved 2013-02-03.
   20. ^ "National Search And Rescue Committee". U. S. Coast Guard Office
       of Search and Rescue. U.S. Coast Guard. Retrieved 26 March 2013.
   21. ^ http://www.nrc.uscg.mil/nrchp.html
   22. ^ National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
       (USA) 2007
   23. ^ "10 USC §101. Definitions" (PDF). Government Printing Office.
       2011. (a)(4).
   24. ^ "14 USC §1. Establishment of Coast Guard" (PDF). Government
       Printing Office. 2011.
   25. ^ "Homeland Security Act of 2002" (PDF). Government Printing
       Office. 25 November 2002.
   26. ^ Baldinelli, D.C. (9 December 2002). "The U.S. Coast Guard's
       Assignment to the Department of Homeland Security: Entering
       Uncharted Waters or Just a Course Correction?". United States Coast
       Guard. United States Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved 18
       January 2014. "On November 25, 2002, President George Bush signed
       the Homeland Security Act, which called for the largest
       reorganization in the U.S. government since the formation of the
       Department of Defense. The reorganization plan will bring together
       twenty-two agencies or parts of agencies from other departments
       such as Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, etc., under
       the control of the Department of Homeland Security. Often such
       large administrative reorganizations inevitability causes a great
       deal of upheaval and anxiety in the affected organizations. One of
       those agencies affected is the United States Coast Guard, which
       will be transferred from the Department of Transportation."
   27. ^ ^a ^b Garamone, Jim (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New
       Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. American Forces Press
       Service. NNS071017-13.
   28. ^ "14 USC §2. Primary duties" (PDF). Government Printing Office.
       2011.
   29. ^ "14 USC §89. Law enforcement" (PDF). Government Printing Office.
       2011.
   30. ^ "18 USC §1385. Use of Army and Air Force as posse comitatus"
       (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011.
   31. ^ "14 USC §143. Treasury Department" (PDF). Government Printing
       Office. 2011.
   32. ^ "19 USC §1401.(i) Officer of the customs; customs officer" (PDF).
       Government Printing Office. 2011.
   33. ^ "19 USC §1589a. Enforcement authority of customs officers" (PDF).
       Government Printing Office. 2011.
   34. ^ "Federal Law Enforcement Survey of Federal Civilian Law
       Enforcement Functions and Authorities" (PDF). Government Accounting
       Office. December 2006. GAO-07-121.
   35. ^ "Law Enforcement Survey Table". Government Accounting Office.
       Retrieved 3 February 2013.
   36. ^ "People v. Booth, ___ N.Y.S.2d ___, 2008 WL 2247068, 2008 N.Y.
       Slip. Op. 28206 (N.Y. Co.Ct. 2008)" (PDF). 24 May 2008.
   37. ^ Papp, Robert J., Jr. (27 September 2012). "The legacy of
       Signalman 1st Class Douglas Munro". Coast Guard Compass.
   38. ^ Ripley, Amanda (23 October 2005). "How the Coast Guard Gets it
       Right". Time. (subscription required (help)).
   39. ^ "Numbered Fleets". Federation of American Scientists. 28 July
       1999.
   40. ^ U.S. Coast Guard Historian's Office. Chronology of Aids to
       Navigation and the United States Lighthouse Service.
       http://www.uscg.mil/history/articles/h_USLHSchron.asp Retrieved: 28
       February 2014.
   41. ^ U.S. Coast Guard Historian's Office.The Steamboat Inspection
       Service & the History of Merchant Vessel Inspection.
       http://www.uscg.mil/history/articles/Steamboat_Inspection_Service.a
       sp Retrieved: 28 February 2014.
   42. ^ Cacas, Max (10 September 2009). "DHS marks new milestone with St.
       E's campus groundbreaking". WFED. Archived from the original on 21
       June 2011.
   43. ^ Leavitt, Michael P. "Coast Guardsman, Not Guardian" (PDF).
       Flotilla 23-1 Annapolis, MD. Retrieved 24 June 2011.
   44. ^ ^a ^b "14 USC §41. Grades and ratings" (PDF). Government Printing
       Office. 2011.
   45. ^ "37 USC §201. Pay grades: assignment to; general rules" (PDF).
       Government Printing Office. 2011.
   46. ^ "Required Uniforms". USCG Uniform Distribution Center. 23 May
       2013.
   47. ^ "History of the Coast Guard Reserve". Coast Guard Historian's
       Office. 26 January 2012.
   48. ^ "Women & the US Coast Guard". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 16
       July 2013.
   49. ^ "Title unknown". ^[dead link]
   50. ^ "USCG Civilian Careers". United States Coast Guard. 28 June
       2013.
   51. ^ "Chapter 10 – Classification and Status of Coast Guard Vessels"
       (PDF). United States Coast Guard Regulations. 1992. COMDINSTM
       5000.3B.
   52. ^ "420-foot Icebreaker (WAGB)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters:
       Cutters. 28 June 2013.
   53. ^ "399-foot Polar Class Icebreakers (WAGB)". Aircraft, Boats, and
       Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013.
   54. ^ "Alaska Lt. Gov. calls for US icebreakers". Fairbanks Daily
       News-Miner. Associated Press. 30 November 2011.
   55. ^ "Northrop Grumman to Supply Polar Ice Breaker Navigation Support
       for U.S. Coast Guard". October 20, 2013.
   56. ^ "U.S. Coast Guard Barque Eagle (WIX-327)". Aircraft, Boats, and
       Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013.
   57. ^ "140-foot Icebreaking Tug (WTGB) - Bay Class". Aircraft, Boats,
       and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013.
   58. ^ "110-foot Patrol Boat (WPB) - Island Class". Aircraft, Boats, and
       Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013.
   59. ^ "87-foot Coastal Patrol Boat (WPB) - Marine Protector Class".
       Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013.
   60. ^ "HC-130H: Hercules". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28 June
       2013.
   61. ^ "HC-130J: Super Hercules". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28
       June 2013.
   62. ^ "HC-144A: Ocean Sentry". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 2
       July 2013.
   63. ^ "HU-25 Guardian". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 7 August 2013.
   64. ^ "HH-60J Sea Hawk / "Jayhawk"". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 7 August
       2013.
   65. ^ "HH/MH-65C: Dolphin". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28 June
       2013.
   66. ^ "C-37A: Gulfstream V". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28
       June 2013.
   67. ^ "Chatham Boats". Station Chatham. 28 June 2013.
   68. ^ "United States Coast Guard Core Values". United States Coast
       Guard Academy. Retrieved 7 August 2013.
   69. ^ "United States Coast Guard Ethos". Training Center Cape
       May. ^[not in citation given]
   70. ^ "The Guardian Ethos" (PDF). U.S. Coast Guard Posture Statement.
       United States Coast Guard. February 2008. p. 17.
   71. ^ "Shipmates 17 - The Coast Guard Ethos" (txt). CGMS General
       Messages. 30 November 2011. ALCOAST 554/11.
   72. ^ "Harry G. Hamlet 1932-1936". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26
       January 2012.
   73. ^ Hamlet, Harry G. (10 October 2012). "Creed of the United States
       Coast Guardsman". Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions.
       Coast Guard Historian's Office.
   74. ^ "What is the origin of the saying "You have to go out, but you
       don't have to come back"?". Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked
       Questions. Coast Guard Historian's Office. 10 October 2012.
   75. ^ "U.S. Coast Guard Flags". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26
       January 2012.
   76. ^ "The Coast Guard Ensign". Coast Guard Historian's Office.
   77. ^ Saba, Anne (January 2000). "Tradition, Service, Honor: The
       Customs Ensign". U.S. Customs Today.
   78. ^ "Coast Guard Ensign (For Release)". Visual Information gallery.
       30 June 1999.
   79. ^ Thiesen, William H., PhD (Summer 2012). "The History of the
       'Racing Stripe' Emblem and Brand" (PDF). Sea History (139).
   80. ^ "U.S. Coast Guard Coatings and Color manual" (PDF). Coast Guard
       Historian's Office. 16 July 1973. CG-263.
   81. ^ "Coatings And Color Manual" (PDF). CG-612 Directives and
       Publications Division. 11 March 2005. COMDTINST M10360.3C.
   82. ^ "When did the Coast Guard adopt the "slash" for its cutters,
       boats, and aircraft?". Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked
       Questions. Coast Guard Historian's Office. 14 February 2013.
   83. ^ "Semper Paratus" (wav). U.S. Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers
       Association Enlisted Association (Sound recording). Archived from
       the original on 17 January 2013.
   84. ^ "Pantone chart with RGB and HTML conversions" (PDF). Planet
       Guide. Retrieved 8 August 2013.
   85. ^ "Uniform Regulations" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. 18
       February 2009. COMDTINST M1020.6F.
   86. ^ ^a ^b "Honoring Our Profession - Uniform Guidance and Results of
       Uniform Board No. 44" (txt). CGMS General Messages. ALCOAST 291/11.
       Retrieved 27 July 2011.
   87. ^ "Title unknown". Defense Technology International: 26.
       January–February 2007.
   88. ^ "U.S. Great Lakes proposed permanent safety zones information
       site". Ninth Coast Guard District. ^[not in citation given]
   89. ^ "Safety Zones; U.S. Coast Guard Water Training Areas, Great
       Lakes" (PDF). Federal Register 71 (147). 1 August 2006.
       pp. 43402–43406.
   90. ^ "U.S. machine-gun fire suspended on Great Lakes". CBC News. 16
       October 2006.
   91. ^ "Some up in arms over fire zones". Columbus Dispatch. 10
       September 2006. ^[dead link]
   92. ^ "Coast GuardPlan". Citizens for Lake Safety. Retrieved 9 August
       2013.
   93. ^ Deployable Operations Group disbanded
   94. ^ "Coast Guard Expects New Deployable Group Operating By Next
       Summer" (PDF). Senior Coast Guard Leadership. Retrieved 3 February
       2013. ^[dead link]
   95. ^ "14 USC PART II—Coast Guard Reserve and Auxiliary" (PDF).
       Government Printing Office. 2011.
   96. ^ Papp, Robert J., Jr. "US Coast Guard Auxiliary Policy Statement"
       (PDF). Retrieved 9 August 2013.
   97. ^ "CG Auxiliary Vessel Examiner Manual" (PDF). CG-612 Directives
       and Publications Division. 20 August 1996. COMDTINST M16796.2E.
   98. ^ "33 CFR § 5.31 Power and authority" (PDF). Government Printing
       Office. 2013.
   99. ^ ^a ^b "SM1c Douglas Albert Munro". Coast Guard Historian's
       Office. 10 October 2012.
   100. ^ "Ancient Albatross Award". Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl.
       Retrieved 3 February 2013.
   101. ^ Chidlow, Nora L. "The Bird That Continues to Fly: A History of
       the Ancient Albatross Award" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's
       Office.
   102. ^ "Coast Guard CW Operators Association".
   103. ^ "U.S. Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Association".
   104. ^ "USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association".
   105. ^ Wise, James E., Jr.; Rehill, Anne Collier (1997). Stars in Blue:
       Movie Actors in America's Sea Services. Annapolis: Naval Institute
       Press. p. 293. ISBN 1-55750-937-9.
   106. ^ "Coast Guard". Film. Retrieved 25 December 2009. ^[dead link]
   107. ^ "Coast Guard Episodes 1995, TV Show". TV Guide online. CBS
       Interactive. Retrieved 1 July 2014.
   108. ^ "Coast Guard (1995–1997) TV Series - Reality-TV". Internet Movie
       Data Base. Amazon.com. Retrieved 1 July 2014.

Further reading[edit]

     * Dolbow, Jim (2012). The Coast Guardsman's Manual (10th ed.). Naval
       Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland. ISBN 978-1591142188.
     * Coast Guard: Observations on Progress Made and Challenges Faced in
       Developing and Implementing a Common Operational Picture: Testimony
       before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation,
       Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of
       Representatives Government Accountability Office

External links[edit]

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Coast Guard.
     * U.S. Coast Guard Website
          + About U.S. Coast Guard
          + Coast Guard Magazine
          + Coast Guard manuals online
          + Coast Guard Flags
          + USCG Homeport Website
     * Coast Guard in the Federal Register
     * Reports on the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security Office
       of Inspector General
     * 'A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower'
     * U.S. Coast Guard Videos
     * Coast Guard Personnel Locator
     * How to join the U.S. Coast Guard
     * U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary Website
     * Coast Guard Channel
     * Coast Guard News
     * Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the U.S.
       Coast Guard
     * USCG News
     * U S Coast Guard Networked. U S Coast Guard Networked Group on
       LinkedIn
     * America's Waterway Watch
     * United States Coast Guard at the Wayback Machine (archived January
       29, 1997)


                             * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Coast Guard
     * Portal Portal:United States Coast Guard
     * Category Category:United States Coast Guard

         Leadership
                            * Secretary of Homeland Security
                            * Commandant of the Coast Guard
                            * Vice Commandant of the United States Coast Guard
                            * Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard

        Organization
                            * Missions
                            * Reserve
                            * Intelligence
                            * Investigative Service
                            * Legal Division
                            * Police
                            * Deployable Operations Group
                              Areas
                            * Districts
                            * Sectors
                            * Stations
                                 + Air Stations
                                 + Radio stations
                            * National Ice Center
                            * Research & Development Center
                            * Coast Guard Auxiliary

   Personnel and training
                            * Personnel
                            * Officer ranks
                            * Enlisted rates
                            * Ratings
                            * Coast Guard Academy
                            * Training Center Cape May
                            * Training Center Petaluma
                            * Training Center Yorktown
                            * Maritime Law Enforcement Academy
                            * Joint Maritime Training Center
                            * Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl
                            * Chaplain of the Coast Guard

   Uniforms and equipment
                            * Uniforms
                            * Awards
                            * Badges
                            * Cutters
                            * List of cutters
                            * Ship commissioning
                            * Ship decommissioning
                            * Equipment

   History and traditions
                            * History
                            * Coast Guard Act
                            * Life-Saving Service
                            * Revenue Cutter Service
                            * Lighthouse Service
                            * Steamboat Inspection Service
                            * Bureau of Navigation
                            * "Semper Paratus"
                            * Flag
                            * Ensign
                            * Racing Stripe
                            * Band
                            * Fleet Week
                            * Coast Guard service numbers
                            * Coast Guardsman's Creed

   Battles and operations
                            * Quasi-War
                            * War of 1812
                            * West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations
                            * Capture of the Bravo
                            * Ingham Incident
                            * Amistad Incident
                            * Great Lakes Patrol
                            * Mexican–American War
                            * American Civil War
                            * Battle of Fort Sumter
                            * Battle of Pig Point
                            * Battle of Galveston Harbor
                            * Battle of Portland Harbor
                            * Overland Relief Expedition
                            * Spanish–American War
                            * Battle of Manila Bay
                            * Battle of Cárdenas
                            * Ice Patrol
                            * World War I
                            * 1st Battle of the Atlantic
                            * Great Mississippi Flood
                            * Rum Patrol
                            * World War II
                            * 2nd Battle of the Atlantic
                            * Battle of Guam
                            * Operation Overlord
                            * Korean War
                            * Vietnam War
                            * Coast Guard Squadron One
                            * Operation Market Time
                            * Operation Sealords
                            * Action of 1 March 1968
                            * Persian Gulf War
                            * War on Terrorism
                            * Afghanistan War
                            * Iraq War
                            * Operation Enduring Freedom HOA


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Agencies under the United States Department of Homeland Security
     * Headquarters: Nebraska Avenue Complex

     * Jeh Johnson, Secretary of Homeland Security
     * Alejandro Mayorkas, Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security

   Deputy Secretary
     * United States Coast Guard
     * Immigration and Customs Enforcement
     * Citizenship and Immigration Services
     * Customs and Border Protection
     * Federal Emergency Management Agency
     * Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
     * United States Secret Service
     * Office of Operations Coordination
     * Transportation Security Administration
     * Office of Health Affairs
     * Office of Policy
     * Office of Immigration Statistics
     * Homeland Security Advisory Council

   A graphically styled American eagle appears in a circular blue field.
   The eagle's outstretched wings break through an inner red ring into an
   outer white ring that contains a circular placement of the words "U.S.
   DEPARTMENT OF" in the top half and "HOMELAND SECURITY" in the bottom
   half. The outer white ring has a silvery gray border. As in The Great
   Seal, the eagle’s left claw holds an olive branch with 13 leaves and 13
   seeds while the right claw grasps 13 arrows. Centered on the eagle's
   breast is a shield divided into three sections containing elements that
   represent the homeland "from sea to shining sea." The top element, a
   dark blue sky, contains 22 stars representing the original 22 agencies
   and bureaus that have come together to form the department. The left
   shield element contains white mountains behind a green plain underneath
   a light blue sky. The right shield element contains four wave shapes
   representing the oceans, lakes and waterways alternating light and dark
   blue separated by white lines.
   National Protection
   and Programs
   National Protection and Programs Directorate
     * Federal Protective Service
     * Office of Cybersecurity and Communications
     * Office of Infrastructure Protection
     * US-VISIT

   Science and
   Technology
   Science and Technology Directorate
     * Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency
     * Explosives Division
     * Chemical and Biological Defense Division
     * Border and Maritime Security Division
     * Human Factors and Behavioral Sciences Division
     * Infrastructure Protection and Disaster Management Division
     * Cyber Security Division (National Cybersecurity Center)

   Intelligence and Analysis
     * Office of Intelligence and Analysis

   Management
     * Management Directorate

     * Law enforcement in the United States
     * Terrorism in the United States


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Armed Forces
     * Wikipedia book Book
     * Portal Portal
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Category Category
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
          + PHS
          + NOAA
     * Navbox
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG

   Leadership
     * Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
     * Secretary of Defense
     * Deputy Secretary of Defense
     * Joint Chiefs of Staff:
          + Chairman
          + Vice Chairman
     * United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:
          + Senate
          + House
     * Active duty four-star officers
     * Highest ranking officers in history
     * National Security Act of 1947
     * Goldwater–Nichols Act

   Organization

   Service departments
     * Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
     * Navy (Secretary)
     * Air Force (Secretary)
     * Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard

   Branches
     * Army (Chief of Staff)
     * Marine Corps (Commandant)
     * Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
     * Air Force (Chief of Staff)
     * Coast Guard (Commandant)

   Other uniformed services
     * Public Health Service Commissioned Corps (Surgeon General)
     * NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps (Director)

   Reserve components
     * Reserves:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * National Guard:
          + A
          + AF
     * State defense forces

   Civilian auxiliaries
     * Military Auxiliary Radio System
     * Merchant Marine
     * Civil Air Patrol
     * Coast Guard Auxiliary

   Unified Combatant Command
     * Northern
     * Central
     * European
     * Pacific
     * Southern
     * Africa
     * Special Operations
     * Strategic
     * Transportation

   Structure
     * United States Code
          + Title 10
          + Title 14
          + Title 32
          + Title 50
     * The Pentagon
     * Installations
     * Units:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Logistics
     * Media

   Operations and history
     * Current deployments
     * Conflicts
     * Wars
     * Timeline
     * History:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Colonial
     * World War II
     * Civil affairs
     * African Americans
     * Asian Americans
     * Jewish Americans
     * Sikh Americans
     * Historiography:
          + A: 1/2
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
     * Art:
          + A
          + AF

   Personnel
   Training
             * MEPS
             * ASVAB
             * Recruit training:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Officer candidate school:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
             * Warrant:
                  + A
                  + MC
             * Service academies:
                  + A (prep)
                  + N (prep)
                  + AF (prep)
                  + CG
                  + Merchant Marine
                  + PHS
             * Junior/Reserve Officers' Training Corps:
                  + A: MJC/SMC
                  + MC/N
                  + AF
             * Medical
             * Other education

   Uniforms
             * Uniforms:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Awards & decorations:
                  + Inter-service
                  + A
                  + MC/N
                  + AF
                  + CG
                  + PHS
                  + NOAA
                  + Foreign
                  + International
                  + Devices
             * Badges:
                  + Identification
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG

    Ranks
             * Enlisted:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Warrant officers
             * Officer:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
                  + PHS
                  + NOAA

    Other
             * Oath:
                  + Enlistment
                  + Office
             * Creeds & Codes:
                  + Code of Conduct
                  + NCO
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Service numbers:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
             * Pay
             * Uniform Code of Military Justice
             * Judge Advocate General's Corps
             * Military Health System/TRICARE
             * Separation
             * Veterans Affairs
             * Conscription
             * Chiefs of Chaplains:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG

   Equipment
     * A
     * MC:
          + vehicles
          + weapons
          + other
     * N
     * AF
     * CG

   Land
          * Individual weapons
          * Crew-served weapons
          * Vehicles (active)

    Sea
          * All watercraft
          * Ships:
               + A
               + N (active)
               + AF
               + CG
               + MSC
               + NOAA
          * Weapons:
               + N
               + CG
          * Aircraft:
               + N
               + CG
               + NOAA
          * Reactors

    Air
          * Aircraft
               + World War I
               + active
          * Aircraft designation
          * Missiles
          * Helicopter arms

   Other
          * Electronics (designations)
          * Flags:
               + A
               + MC
               + N
               + AF
               + CG
               + Ensign
               + Jack
               + Guidons
          * Food
          * WMDs:
               + Nuclear
               + Biological
               + Chemical

   Legend
          A = Army
          MC = Marine Corps
          N = Navy
          AF = Air Force
          CG = Coast Guard
          PHS = Public Health Service
          NOAA = National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
          MSC = Military Sealift Command


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States
   Department of Agriculture
     * U.S. Forest Service: Law Enforcement and Investigations

   Department of Commerce
     * Office of Export Enforcement
     * National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office
       for Law Enforcement

   Department of Defense
     * Defense Criminal Investigative Service
     * Department of Defense Police
     * Defense Logistics Agency Police
     * Pentagon Force Protection Agency (Pentagon Police)
     * National Security Agency Police
     * Defense Intelligence Agency Police
     * National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency Police

   Department of the Army
     * United States Army Intelligence and Security Command
     * United States Army Criminal Investigation Command
     * United States Army Military Police Corps
     * Department of the Army Police
     * United States Army Corrections Command

   Department of the Navy
     * Naval Criminal Investigative Service
     * Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division
     * Department of the Navy Police
     * Marine Corps Provost Marshal's Office
     * United States Marine Corps Police
     * United States Naval Academy Police
     * Master-at-Arms

   Department of the Air Force
     * United States Air Force Office of Special Investigations
     * United States Air Force Security Forces
     * Department of the Air Force Police

   Department of Energy
     * Office of Health, Safety and Security
     * Office of Secure Transportation

   Department of Health and Human Services
     * United States Food and Drug Administration (Office of Criminal
       Investigations)
     * National Institutes of Health Police

   Department of Homeland Security
     * Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
     * United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
     * United States Coast Guard (Coast Guard Investigative Service ·
       United States Coast Guard Police)
     * United States Customs and Border Protection
     * Federal Protective Service
     * United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement
     * United States Secret Service
     * Transportation Security Administration (Office of Law Enforcement ·
       Federal Air Marshal Service)

   Department of the Interior
     * Bureau of Indian Affairs Police
     * Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement
     * Hoover Dam Police
     * National Park Service: Division of Law Enforcement, Security and
       Emergency Services (Rangers · United States Park Police)
     * Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement
     * National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement

   Department of Justice
     * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives
     * Drug Enforcement Administration
     * Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI Police)
     * Federal Bureau of Prisons
     * United States Marshals Service

   Department of State
     * Bureau of Diplomatic Security (Diplomatic Security Service · Office
       of Foreign Missions)

   Department of Transportation
     * United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety

   Department of the Treasury
     * Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
     * Bureau of Engraving and Printing Police
     * Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
     * Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation Division
     * United States Mint Police

   Department of Veterans Affairs
     * Department of Veterans Affairs Police

   United States Congress
     * Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives
     * Sergeant at Arms of the Senate
     * United States Capitol Police
     * Government Printing Office Police

   Judicial branch
     * U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System
     * Marshal of the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court Police)

   Other federal law enforcement agencies
     * Amtrak Police
     * Central Intelligence Agency Security Protective Service
     * Environmental Protection Agency Office of Enforcement and
       Compliance Assurance
     * Federal Reserve Police
     * National Zoological Park Police
     * Postal Inspection Service (U.S. Postal Police)
     * Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


              * v
     * t
     * e

   Coast guards
     * Argentina
     * Aruba
     * Australia
     * Bangladesh
     * Barbados
     * Belize
     * Canada
     * China
     * Croatia
     * Cyprus
     * Egypt
     * France
     * Germany
     * Greece
     * Haiti
     * Iceland
     * India
     * Ireland
     * Isle of Man
     * Italy
     * Japan
     * Jersey
     * Malaysia
     * Maldives
     * Mexico
     * Netherlands
     * Netherlands (Caribbean)
     * New Zealand
     * Norway
     * Pakistan (Coast Guard·MSA)
     * Peru
     * Philippines
     * Russia
     * Singapore
     * South Korea
     * Sri Lanka
     * Sweden
     * Taiwan
     * Turkey
     * Ukraine
     * United Arab Emirates
     * United Kingdom
     * United States of America
     * Vietnam
     * Yemen


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Alexander Hamilton

                  January 11, 1755 or 1757—July 12, 1804

     * Commanding General of the United States Army, 1799-1800
     * 1st Secretary of the Treasury, 1789-1795
     * Delegate, Congress of the Confederation, 1782-1783, 1788-1789

   United States
   Founding events
     * A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress (1774)
     * The Farmer Refuted (1775)
     * Delegate, Annapolis Convention
     * Delegate, 1787 Constitutional Convention
     * Initiated, main author, The Federalist Papers
          + written by Hamilton
     * Founding Father

   Secretary of
   the Treasury
     * First Bank of the United States
     * Coinage Act of 1792
          + United States Mint
     * Revenue Marine (United States Coast Guard)
     * United States Customs Service
     * First Report on the Public Credit (1790)
     * Operations of the Act Laying Duties on Imports (1790)
     * Second Report on Public Credit (1790, a.k.a. Report on a National
       Bank)
     * Report On Manufactures (1791)
     * Tariff of 1792
     * Whiskey Rebellion
     * Residence Act
          + Compromise of 1790
     * Jay Treaty

   Military career
     * New York Provincial Company of Artillery
     * In the Revolutionary War
     * Battles: Harlem Heights
     * White Plains
     * Trenton
     * General Washington's Aide-de-Camp
     * Princeton
     * Brandywine
     * Germantown
     * Monmouth
     * Siege of Yorktown
     * Major General, Quasi-War preparation

   Other events
     * Founder, Federalist Party
     * Founder, Bank of New York
     * Bank of North America
     * Advisor, George Washington's Farewell Address
     * President-General, Society of the Cincinnati
     * Hamilton–Reynolds sex scandal
     * Rutgers v. Waddington

   Legacy and
   popular culture
     * Alexander Hamilton statue
     * United States ten-dollar bill
     * Postage stamps
     * Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
     * Hamilton Hall, Columbia University
     * Fort Hamilton
     * Alexander Hamilton High School
     * Hamilton Heights, Manhattan

   Related
     * American Philosophical Society
     * New York Manumission Society
          + African Free School

   Family
     * Elizabeth Schuyler (wife)
     * Alexander Hamilton Jr. (son)
     * James Alexander Hamilton | (son)
     * John Church Hamilton (son)
     * William S. Hamilton (son)
     * Schuyler Hamilton (grandson)

     * Commons page Commons
     * Wikibooks page Wikibooks
     * Wikiquote page Wikiquote
     * Wikisource page Wikisource
     * American Revolutionary War Portal

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Coast_Guard&ol
   did=625367855"
   Categories:
     * 1915 establishments in the United States
     * Coast guards
     * Gendarmerie
     * Organizations based in Washington, D.C.
     * Sea rescue organisations
     * Uniformed services of the United States
     * United States Coast Guard
     * United States Department of Homeland Security

   Hidden categories:
     * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from February 2011
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013
     * Articles with dead external links from August 2013
     * Use dmy dates from August 2013
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012
     * All articles containing potentially dated statements
     * Articles to be expanded from August 2013
     * All articles to be expanded
     * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013
     * Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Afrikaans
     * العربية
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Eesti
     * Español
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 한국어
     * Hrvatski
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * Latviešu
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Occitan
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Scots
     * Simple English
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * ייִדיש
     * 粵語
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 13 September 2014 at 12:45.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
