   #alternate Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia Atom feed

United States Bill of Rights

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   This is a good article. Click here for more information.
   Page semi-protected
    United States Bill of Rights
   Bill of Rights Pg1of1 AC.jpg
   United States Bill of Rights
    Created  September 25, 1789
   Ratified  December 15, 1791
   Location  National Archives
   Author(s) James Madison
   United States of America
   Great Seal of the United States
   This article is part a series on the
                      United States Constitution
                         Preamble and Articles
   of the Constitution
     * Preamble

     * I
     * II
     * III
     * IV
     * V
     * VI
     * VII

                    Amendments to the Constitution
     * Ratified Amendments
       The first ten Amendments are collectively known as the Bill of
       Rights

     * I
     * II
     * III
     * IV
     * V
     * VI
     * VII
     * VIII
     * IX
     * X
     * XI
     * XII
     * XIII
     * XIV
     * XV
     * XVI
     * XVII
     * XVIII
     * XIX
     * XX
     * XXI
     * XXII
     * XXIII
     * XXIV
     * XXV
     * XXVI
     * XXVII

     * Unratified Amendments

     * Congressional Apportionment
     * Titles of Nobility
     * Corwin
     * Child Labor
     * Equal Rights
     * D.C. Voting Rights

                     Full text of the Constitution
   and Amendments
     * Preamble & Articles I–VII
     * Amendments I–X
     * Amendments XI–XXVII
     * Unratified Amendments

     * US Government Portal
     * Law Portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

   The Bill of Rights is the collective name for the first ten amendments
   to the United States Constitution. Proposed to assuage the fears of
   Anti-Federalists who had opposed Constitutional ratification, these
   amendments guarantee a number of personal freedoms, limit the
   government's power in judicial and other proceedings, and reserve some
   powers to the states and the public. Originally the amendments applied
   only to the federal government, however, most were subsequently applied
   to the government of each state by way of the Fourteenth Amendment,
   through a process known as incorporation.

   On June 8, 1789 Representative James Madison introduced a series of
   thirty-nine amendments to the constitution in the House of
   Representatives. Among his recommendations Madison proposed opening up
   the Constitution and inserting specific rights limiting the power of
   Congress in Article One, Section 9. Seven of these limitations would
   became part of the ten ratified Bill of Rights amendments. Ultimately,
   on September 25, 1789, Congress approved twelve articles of amendment
   to the Constitution and submitted them to the states for ratification.
   Contrary to Madison’s original proposal that the articles be
   incorporated into the main body of the Constitution, they were proposed
   as "supplemental" additions to it. On December 15, 1791, Articles
   Three–Twelve, having been ratified by the required number of states,
   became Amendments One–Ten of the Constitution.

   On May 7, 1992, after an unprecedented period of
   7002202000000000000202 years, 7002225000000000000225 days, Article Two
   crossed the Constitutional threshold for ratification and became the
   Twenty-seventh Amendment. As a result, Article One alone remains
   unratified and still pending before the states.

   The Bill of Rights enumerates freedoms not explicitly indicated in the
   main body of the Constitution, such as freedom of religion, freedom of
   speech, a free press, and free assembly; the right to keep and bear
   arms; freedom from unreasonable search and seizure, security in
   personal effects, and freedom from warrants issued without probable
   cause; indictment by a grand jury for any capital or "infamous crime";
   guarantee of a speedy, public trial with an impartial jury; and
   prohibition of double jeopardy. In addition, the Bill of Rights
   reserves for the people any rights not specifically mentioned in the
   Constitution and reserves all powers not specifically granted to the
   federal government to the people or the States. The Bill was influenced
   by George Mason's 1776 Virginia Declaration of Rights, the English Bill
   of Rights 1689, and earlier English political documents such as Magna
   Carta (1215).

   The Bill of Rights had little judicial impact for the first 150 years
   of its existence, but was the basis for many Supreme Court decisions of
   the 20th and 21st centuries. One of the first fourteen copies of the
   Bill of Rights is on public display at the National Archives in
   Washington, D.C.

Contents

     * 1 Background
          + 1.1 The Philadelphia Convention
          + 1.2 The Anti-Federalists
          + 1.3 The Federalists
          + 1.4 Massachusetts compromise
     * 2 Proposal and ratification
          + 2.1 Anticipating amendments
          + 2.2 Crafting amendments
          + 2.3 Ratification process
     * 3 Application
          + 3.1 First Amendment
          + 3.2 Second Amendment
          + 3.3 Third Amendment
          + 3.4 Fourth Amendment
          + 3.5 Fifth Amendment
          + 3.6 Sixth Amendment
          + 3.7 Seventh Amendment
          + 3.8 Eighth Amendment
          + 3.9 Ninth Amendment
          + 3.10 Tenth Amendment
     * 4 Display and honoring of the Bill of Rights
     * 5 See also
     * 6 References
     * 7 Further reading
     * 8 External links

Background

The Philadelphia Convention

   Main article: Constitutional Convention (United States)

   Prior to the ratification and implementation of the United States
   Constitution, the thirteen sovereign states followed the Articles of
   Confederation, created by the Second Continental Congress and ratified
   in 1781. However, the national government that operated under the
   Articles of Confederation was too weak to adequately regulate the
   various conflicts that arose between the states.^[1] The Philadelphia
   Convention set out to correct weaknesses of the Articles that had been
   apparent even before the American Revolutionary War had been
   successfully concluded.^[1]

   The convention took place from May 14 to September 17, 1787, in
   Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Although the Convention was purportedly
   intended only to revise the Articles, the intention of many of its
   proponents, chief among them James Madison of Virginia and Alexander
   Hamilton of New York, was to create a new government rather than fix
   the existing one. The convention convened in the Pennsylvania State
   House, and George Washington of Virginia was unanimously elected as
   president of the convention.^[2] The 55 delegates who drafted the
   Constitution are among the men known as the Founding Fathers of the new
   nation. Thomas Jefferson, who was Minister to France during the
   convention, characterized the delegates as an assembly of
   "demi-gods."^[1] Rhode Island refused to send delegates to the
   convention.^[3]

   On September 12, George Mason of Virginia suggested the addition of a
   Bill of Rights to the Constitution modeled on previous state
   declarations, and Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts made it a formal
   motion.^[4] However, the motion was defeated by a unanimous vote of the
   state delegations after only a brief discussion. Madison, then an
   opponent of a Bill of Rights, later explained the vote by calling the
   state bills of rights "parchment barriers" that offered only an
   illusion of protection against tyranny.^[5] Another delegate, James
   Wilson of Pennsylvania, later argued that the act of enumerating the
   rights of the people would have been dangerous, because it would imply
   that rights not explicitly mentioned did not exist;^[5] Hamilton echoed
   this point in Federalist No. 84.^[6] Because Mason and Gerry had
   emerged as opponents of the proposed new Constitution, their
   motion—introduced five days before the end of the convention—may also
   have been seen by other delegates as a delaying tactic.^[7] The quick
   rejection of this motion, however, later endangered the entire
   ratification process. Author David O. Stewart calls the omission of a
   Bill of Rights in the original Constitution as "a political blunder of
   the first magnitude"^[7] while historian Jack N. Rakove calls it "the
   one serious miscalculation the framers made as they looked ahead to the
   struggle over ratification".^[8]

   Thirty-nine delegates signed the finalized Constitution. Thirteen
   delegates left before it was completed, and three who remained at the
   convention until the end refused to sign it: Mason, Gerry, and Edmund
   Randolph of Virginia.^[9] Afterward, the Constitution was presented to
   the Articles of Confederation Congress with the request that it
   afterwards be submitted to a convention of delegates, chosen in each
   State by the people, for their assent and ratification.^[10]

The Anti-Federalists

   On June 5, 1788, Patrick Henry spoke before Virginia's ratification
   convention in opposition to the Constitution.

   Following the Philadelphia Convention, some leading revolutionary
   figures such as Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, and Richard Henry Lee
   publicly opposed the Constitution, a position known as
   "Anti-Federalism".^[11] Elbridge Gerry wrote the most popular
   Anti-Federalist tract, "Hon. Mr. Gerry's Objections", which went
   through 46 printings; the essay particularly focused on the lack of a
   bill of rights in the proposed constitution.^[12] Many were concerned
   that a strong national government was a threat to individual rights and
   that the President would become a king. Jefferson wrote to Madison
   advocating a Bill of Rights: "Half a loaf is better than no bread. If
   we cannot secure all our rights, let us secure what we can."^[13]

   The pseudonymous Anti-Federalist "Brutus"^[a] wrote,

     We find they have, in the ninth section of the first article
     declared, that the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended,
     unless in cases of rebellion — that no bill of attainder, or ex post
     facto law, shall be passed — that no title of nobility shall be
     granted by the United States, etc. If every thing which is not given
     is reserved, what propriety is there in these exceptions? Does this
     Constitution any where grant the power of suspending the habeas
     corpus, to make ex post facto laws, pass bills of attainder, or
     grant titles of nobility? It certainly does not in express terms.
     The only answer that can be given is, that these are implied in the
     general powers granted. With equal truth it may be said, that all
     the powers which the bills of rights guard against the abuse of, are
     contained or implied in the general ones granted by this
     Constitution.^[15]

   Brutus continued with an implication directed against the
   Constitution's framers:

     Ought not a government, vested with such extensive and indefinite
     authority, to have been restricted by a declaration of rights? It
     certainly ought. So clear a point is this, that I cannot help
     suspecting that persons who attempt to persuade people that such
     reservations were less necessary under this Constitution than under
     those of the States, are wilfully endeavoring to deceive, and to
     lead you into an absolute state of vassalage.^[16]

The Federalists

   Supporters of the Constitution, known as Federalists, opposed a bill of
   rights for much of the ratification period, in part due to the
   procedural uncertainties it would create.^[17] Madison argued against
   such an inclusion, suggesting that state governments were sufficient
   guarantors of personal liberty, in No. 46 of The Federalist Papers, a
   series of essays promoting the Federalist position.^[18] Hamilton
   opposed a Bill of Rights in Federalist No. 84, stating that "the
   constitution is itself in every rational sense, and to every useful
   purpose, A BILL OF RIGHTS."^[19] He stated that ratification did not
   mean the American people were surrendering their rights, making
   protections unnecessary: "Here, in strictness, the people surrender
   nothing, and as they retain everything, they have no need of particular
   reservations."^[19] Critics pointed out that earlier political
   documents had protected specific rights, but Hamilton argued that the
   Constitution was inherently different:

     Bills of rights are in their origin, stipulations between kings and
     their subjects, abridgments of prerogative in favor of privilege,
     reservations of rights not surrendered to the prince. Such was
     "Magna Charta," obtained by the Barons, swords in hand, from King
     John.^[19]

   Patrick Henry argued, in contrast, that the legislature must be firmly
   informed "of the extent of the rights retained by the people ... being
   in a state of uncertainty, they will assume rather than give up powers
   by implication."^[20]

Massachusetts compromise

   George Washington's 1788 letter to the Marquis de Lafayette observed,
   "the Convention of Massachusetts adopted the Constitution in toto; but
   recommended a number of specific alterations and quieting
   explanations." Source: Library of Congress

   In December 1787 and January 1788, five states—Delaware, Pennsylvania,
   New Jersey, Georgia, and Connecticut—ratified the Constitution with
   relative ease, though the bitter minority report of the Pennsylvania
   opposition was widely circulated.^[21] In contrast to its predecessors,
   the Massachusetts convention was angry and contentious, at one point
   erupting into a fistfight between Federalist delegate Francis Dana and
   Anti-Federalist Elbridge Gerry when the latter was not allowed to
   speak.^[22] The impasse was resolved only when revolutionary heroes and
   leading Anti-Federalists Samuel Adams and John Hancock agreed to
   ratification on the condition that the convention also propose
   amendments.^[23] The convention's proposed amendments included a
   requirement for grand jury indictment in capital cases, which would
   form part of the Fifth Amendment, and an amendment reserving powers to
   the states not expressly given to the federal government, which would
   later form the basis for the Tenth Amendment.^[24]

   Following Massachusetts' lead, the Federalist minorities in both
   Virginia and New York were able to obtain ratification in convention by
   linking ratification to recommended amendments.^[25] A committee of the
   Virginia convention headed by law professor George Wythe forwarded
   forty recommended amendments to Congress, twenty of which enumerated
   individual rights and another twenty of which enumerated states'
   rights.^[26] The latter amendments included limitations on federal
   powers to levy taxes and regulate trade.^[27]

   A minority of the Constitution's critics, such as Maryland's Luther
   Martin, continued to oppose ratification.^[28] However, Martin's
   allies, such as New York's John Lansing, Jr., dropped moves to obstruct
   the Convention's process. They began to take exception to the
   Constitution "as it was," seeking amendments. Several conventions saw
   supporters for "amendments before" shift to a position of "amendments
   after" for the sake of staying in the Union. The New York
   Anti-Federalist "circular letter" was sent to each state legislature
   proposing a second constitutional convention for "amendments before",
   but it failed in the state legislatures. Ultimately, only North
   Carolina and Rhode Island waited for amendments from Congress before
   ratifying.^[25]

   Article Seven of the proposed Constitution set the terms by which the
   new frame of government would be established. The new Constitution
   would become operational only when ratified by at least nine states
   (three-quarters of the thirteen states), and would only be established
   between the states ratifying it.

   The new Constitution would be inoperative unless ratified by at least
   nine states (three-quarters of the thirteen states). Only then would it
   replace the existing government under the Articles of Confederation. It
   would apply only to those states that ratified it, and it would be
   valid for all states joining after. Following contentious battles in
   several states, the proposed Constitution reached that nine state
   ratification plateau in June 1788. On September 13, 1788, the Articles
   of Confederation Congress certified that the new Constitution had been
   ratified by more than enough states for the new system to be
   implemented and directed the new government to meet in New York City on
   the first Wednesday in March the following year.^[29] On March 4, 1789,
   the government began operations with eleven of the thirteen states
   participating.

Proposal and ratification

Anticipating amendments

   James Madison, "Father of the Constitution" and first author of the
   Bill of Rights

   The 1st United States Congress, which met in New York City's Federal
   Hall, was a triumph for the Federalists. The Senate of eleven states
   contained 20 Federalists with only two Anti-Federalists, both from
   Virginia. The House included 48 Federalists to 11 Anti-Federalists, the
   latter of whom were from only four states: Massachusetts, New York,
   Virginia and South Carolina.^[30]

   Among the Virginia delegation to the House was James Madison, Patrick
   Henry's chief opponent in the Virginia ratification battle. In
   retaliation for Madison's victory at that convention, Henry and other
   Anti-Federalists, who controlled the Virginia House of Delegates had
   gerrymandered a hostile district for Madison's planned congressional
   run and recruited Madison's future presidential successor, James
   Monroe, to oppose him.^[31] Madison defeated Monroe after offering a
   campaign pledge that he would introduce constitutional amendments
   comprising a Bill of Rights at the First Congress.^[32]

   Though Madison had originally opposed a Bill of Rights, he had
   gradually come to support one in the course of ratification debates. By
   taking the initiative to propose amendments himself through the
   Congress, he hoped to preempt a second Constitutional Convention that
   might have undone the difficult compromises of 1787: a second
   convention would open the entire Constitution to reconsideration and
   risk dissolving the federal Government. Writing to Jefferson, he
   stated, "The friends of the Constitution, some from an approbation of
   particular amendments, others from a spirit of conciliation, are
   generally agreed that the System should be revised. But they wish the
   revisal to be carried no farther than to supply additional guards for
   liberty."^[33] He also felt that amendments guaranteeing personal
   liberties would "give to the Government its due popularity and
   stability".^[34] Finally, he hoped that the amendments "would acquire
   by degrees the character of fundamental maxims of free government, and
   as they become incorporated with the national sentiment, counteract the
   impulses of interest and passion".^[35] Historians continue to debate
   the degree to which Madison considered the amendments of the Bill of
   Rights necessary, and to what degree he considered them politically
   expedient; in the outline of his address, he wrote, "Bill of
   Rights—useful—not essential—".^[36]

   On the occasion of his April 30, 1789 inauguration as the nation's
   first President, George Washington addressed the subject of amending
   the Constitution. He urged the legislators,

     whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might endanger the
     benefits of an united and effective government, or which ought to
     await the future lessons of experience; a reverence for the
     characteristic rights of freemen, and a regard for public harmony,
     will sufficiently influence your deliberations on the question, how
     far the former can be impregnably fortified or the latter be safely
     and advantageously promoted.^[37]^[38]

Crafting amendments

   James Madison introduced a series of Constitutional amendments in the
   House of Representatives for consideration. Among his proposals was one
   that would have added introductory language stressing natural rights to
   the preamble.^[39] Another would apply parts of the Bill of Rights to
   the states as well as the federal government. Several sought to protect
   individual personal rights by limiting various Constitutional the
   powers of Congress. Like Washington, Madison urged Congress to keep the
   revision to the Constitution "a moderate one", limited to protecting
   individual rights.^[39]

   Madison was deeply read in the history of government and used a range
   of sources in composing the amendments. The English Magna Carta of 1215
   inspired the right to petition and to trial by jury, for example, while
   the English Bill of Rights of 1689 provided an early precedent for the
   right to keep and bear arms and prohibited cruel and unusual
   punishment.^[27] The greatest influence on Madison's text, however, was
   existing state constitutions.^[40]^[41] Many of his amendments,
   including his proposed new preamble, were based on the Virginia
   Declaration of Rights drafted by Anti-Federalist George Mason in
   1776.^[42] To reduce future opposition to ratification, Madison also
   looked for recommendations shared by many states.^[41]

        James Madison's proposed amendments to the Constitution:^[43]

     First. That there be prefixed to the constitution a declaration that
     all power is originally vested in, and consequently derived from the
     people.
     That government is instituted, and ought to be exercised for the
     benefit of the people; which consists in the enjoyment of life and
     liberty, with the right of acquiring and using property, and
     generally of pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.
     That the people have an indubitable, unalienable, and indefeasible
     right to reform or change their government, whenever it be found
     adverse or inadequate to the purposes of its institution.
     Secondly. That in article 1st, section 2, clause 3, these words be
     struck out, to wit: "The number of Representatives shall not exceed
     one for every thirty thousand, but each State shall have at least
     one Representative, and until such enumeration shall be made;" and
     in place thereof be inserted these words, to wit: "After the first
     actual enumeration, there shall be one Representative for every
     thirty thousand, until the number amounts to—, after which the
     proportion shall be so regulated by Congress, that the number shall
     never be less than—, nor more than—, but each State shall, after the
     first enumeration, have at least two Representatives; and prior
     thereto."
     Thirdly. That in article 2nd, section 6, clause 1, there be added to
     the end of the first sentence, these words, to wit, "But no law
     varying the compensation last ascertained shall operate before the
     next ensuing election of representatives."
     Fourthly. That in article 2nd, section 9, between clauses 3 and 4,
     be inserted these clauses, to wit, The civil rights of none shall be
     abridged on account of religious belief or worship, nor shall any
     national religion be established, nor shall the full and equal
     rights of conscience by in any manner, or on any pretext infringed.
     The people shall not be deprived or abridged of their right to
     speak, to write, or to publish their sentiments; and the freedom of
     the press, as one of the great bulwarks of liberty, shall be
     inviolable.
     The people shall not be restrained from peaceably assembling and
     consulting for their common good, nor from applying to the
     legislature by petitions, or remonstrances for redress of their
     grievances.
     The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
     infringed; a well armed, and well regulated militia being the best
     security of a free country: but no person religiously scrupulous of
     bearing arms, shall be compelled to render military service in
     person.
     No soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without
     the consent of the owner; nor at any time, but in a manner warranted
     by law.
     No person shall be subject, except in cases of impeachment, to more
     than one punishment, or one trial for the same office; nor shall be
     compelled to be a witness against himself; nor be deprived of life,
     liberty, or property without due process of law; nor be obliged to
     relinquish his property, where it may be necessary for public use,
     without a just compensation.
     Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
     nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
     The rights of the people to be secured in their persons, their
     houses, their papers, and their other property from all unreasonable
     searches and seizures, shall not be violated by warrants issued
     without probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, or not
     particularly describing the places to be searched, or the persons or
     things to be seized.
     In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
     speedy and public trial, to be informed of the cause and nature of
     the accusation, to be confronted with his accusers, and the
     witnesses against him; to have a compulsory process for obtaining
     witnesses in his favor; and to have the assistance of counsel for
     his defense.
     The exceptions here or elsewhere in the constitution, made in favor
     of particular rights, shall not be so construed as to diminish the
     just importance of other rights retained by the people; or as to
     enlarge the powers delegated by the constitution; but either as
     actual limitations of such powers, or as inserted merely for greater
     caution.
     Fifthly. That in article 2nd, section 10, between clauses 1 and 2,
     be inserted this clause, to wit: No state shall violate the equal
     rights of conscience, or the freedom of the press, or the trial by
     jury in criminal cases
     Sixthly. That article 3rd, section 2, be annexed to the end of
     clause 2nd, these words to wit: but no appeal to such court shall be
     allowed where the value in controversy shall not amount to —
     dollars: nor shall any fact triable by jury, according to the course
     of common law, be otherwise re—examinable than may consist with the
     principles of common law.
     Seventhly. That in article 3rd, section 2, the third clause be
     struck out, and in its place be inserted the classes following, to
     wit:
     The trial of all crimes (except in cases of impeachments, and cases
     arising in the land or naval forces, or the militia when on actual
     service in time of war or public danger) shall be by an impartial
     jury of freeholders of the vicinage, with the requisite of unanimity
     for conviction, of the right of challenge, and other accustomed
     requisites; and in all crimes punishable with loss of life or
     member, presentment or indictment by a grand jury shall be an
     essential preliminary, provided that in cases of crimes committed
     within any county which may be in possession of an enemy, or in
     which a general insurrection may prevail, the trial may by law be
     authorized in some other county of the same State, as near as may be
     to the seat of the offence.
     In cases of crimes committed not within any county, the trial may by
     law be in such county as the laws shall have prescribed. In suits at
     common law, between man and man, the trial by jury, as one of the
     best securities to the rights of the people, ought to remain
     inviolate.
     Eighthly. That immediately after article 6th, be inserted, as
     article 7th, the clauses following, to wit:
     The powers delegated by this constitution, are appropriated to the
     departments to which they are respectively distributed: so that the
     legislative department shall never exercise the powers vested in the
     executive or judicial; nor the executive exercise the powers vested
     in the legislative or judicial; nor the judicial exercise the powers
     vested in the legislative or executive departments.
     The powers not delegated by this constitution, nor prohibited by it
     to the states, are reserved to the States respectively.
     Ninthly. That article 7th, be numbered as article 8th.

   Federalist representatives were quick to attack Madison's proposal,
   fearing that any move to amend the new Constitution so soon after its
   implementation would create an appearance of instability in the
   government.^[44] The House, unlike the Senate, was open to the public,
   and members such as Fisher Ames warned that a prolonged "dissection of
   the constitution" before the galleries could shake public
   confidence.^[45] A procedural battle followed, and after initially
   forwarding the amendments to a select committee for revision, the House
   agreed to take Madison's proposal up as a full body beginning on July
   21, 1789.^[46]^[47]

   The eleven-member committee made some significant changes to Madison's
   proposed amendments, including eliminating most of his preamble, adding
   the phrase "freedom of speech, and of the press", and adding what would
   become the Tenth Amendment, reserving powers to the states.^[48] The
   House debated the amendments for eleven days. Roger Sherman of
   Connecticut persuaded the House to place the amendments at the
   Constitution's end so that the document would "remain inviolate",
   rather than adding them throughout, as Madison had proposed.^[49] The
   amendments, revised and condensed from twenty to seventeen, were
   approved and forwarded to the Senate on August 24, 1789.^[50]

   The Senate edited these amendments still further, making 26 changes of
   its own. Madison's proposal to apply parts of the Bill of Rights to the
   states as well as the federal government was eliminated, and the
   seventeen amendments were condensed to twelve, which were approved on
   September 9, 1789.^[51] The Senate also eliminated the last of
   Madison's proposed changes to the preamble.^[52]

   On September 21, 1789, a House–Senate Conference Committee convened to
   resolve the numerous differences between the two Bill of Rights
   proposals. On September 24, 1789, the committee issued this report,
   which finalized 12 Constitutional Amendments for House and Senate to
   consider. This final version was approved by joint resolution of
   Congress on September 25, 1789, to be forwarded to the states on
   September 28.^[53]^[54]

   By the time the debates and legislative maneuvering that went into
   crafting the Bill of Rights amendments was done, many personal opinions
   opinions had shifted. A number of Federalists came out in support, thus
   silencing the Anti-Federalists' most effective critique. Many
   Anti-Federalists, in contrast, were now opposed, realizing that
   Congressional approval of these amendments would greatly lessen the
   chances of a second constitutional convention.^[55] Anti-Federalists
   such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most
   objectionable portions of the Constitution, such as the federal
   judiciary and direct taxation, intact.^[56]

   Madison remained active in the progress of the amendments throughout
   the legislative process. Historian Gordon S. Wood writes that "there is
   no question that it was Madison's personal prestige and his dogged
   persistence that saw the amendments through the Congress. There might
   have been a federal Constitution without Madison but certainly no Bill
   of Rights."^[57]

   Approval of the Bill of Rights in Congress and the States^[43]

                             Seventeen Articles
                            Approved by the House
                               August 24, 1789

                               Twelve Articles
                           Approved by the Senate
                              September 9, 1789

                               Twelve Articles
                            Approved by Congress
                             September 25, 1789

                                Ratification
                                   Status

   First Article:
   After the first enumeration, required by the first Article of the
   Constitution, there shall be one Representative for every thirty
   thousand, until the number shall amount to one hundred, after which the
   proportion shall be so regulated by Congress, that there shall be not
   less than one hundred Representatives, nor less than one Representative
   for every forty thousand persons, until the number of Representatives
   shall amount to two hundred, after which the proportion shall be so
   regulated by Congress, that there shall not be less than two hundred
   Representatives, nor less than one Representative for every fifty
   thousand persons. First Article:
   After the first enumeration, required by the first article of the
   Constitution, there shall be one Representative for every thirty
   thousand, until the number shall amount to one hundred; to which number
   one Representative shall be added for every subsequent increase of
   forty thousand, until the Representatives shall amount to two hundred,
   to which number one Representative shall be added for every subsequent
   increase of sixty thousand persons. First Article:
   After the first enumeration required by the first article of the
   Constitution, there shall be one Representative for every thirty
   thousand, until the number shall amount to one hundred, after which the
   proportion shall be so regulated by Congress, that there shall be not
   less than one hundred Representatives, nor less than one Representative
   for every forty thousand persons, until the number of Representatives
   shall amount to two hundred; after which the proportion shall be so
   regulated by Congress, that there shall not be less than two hundred
   Representatives, nor more than one Representative for every fifty
   thousand persons. Pending:
   Congressional Apportionment Amendment
   Second Article:
   No law varying the compensation to the members of Congress, shall take
   effect, until an election of Representatives shall have intervened.
   Second Article:
   No law, varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and
   Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of
   Representatives shall have intervened. Second Article:
   No law, varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and
   Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of
   Representatives shall have intervened. Ratified:
   May 7, 1992
   Twenty-seventh Amendment
   Third Article:
   Congress shall make no law establishing religion or prohibiting the
   free exercise thereof, nor shall the rights of Conscience be infringed.
   Third Article:
   Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
   prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of
   speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
   assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
   Third Article:
   Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
   prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of
   speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
   assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
   Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   First Amendment
   Fourth Article:
   The Freedom of Speech, and of the Press, and the right of the People
   peaceably to assemble, and consult for their common good, and to apply
   to the Government for a redress of grievances, shall not be infringed.
   (see Third Article above)
   Fifth Article:
   A well regulated militia, composed of the body of the People, being the
   best security of a free State, the right of the People to keep and bear
   arms, shall not be infringed, but no one religiously scrupulous of
   bearing arms, shall be compelled to render military service in person.
   Fourth Article:
   A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free
   State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be
   infringed. Fourth Article:
   A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free
   State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be
   infringed. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Second Amendment
   Sixth Article:
   No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without
   the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
   prescribed by law. Fifth Article:
   No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without
   the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
   prescribed by law. Fifth Article:
   No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without
   the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
   prescribed by law. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Third Amendment
   Seventh Article:
   The right of the People to be secure in their persons, houses, papers
   and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
   violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause
   supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
   to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. Sixth Article:
   The right of the People to be secure in their persons, houses, papers
   and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
   violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause
   supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
   to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. Sixth Article:
   The right of the People to be secure in their persons, houses, papers
   and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
   violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause
   supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
   to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Fourth Amendment
   Eighth Article:
   No person shall be subject, except in case of impeachment, to more than
   one trial, or one punishment for the same offense, nor shall be
   compelled in any criminal case, to be a witness against himself, nor be
   deprived of life, liberty or property, without due process of law; nor
   shall private property be taken for public use without just
   compensation. Seventh Article:
   No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous
   crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in
   cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in
   actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall any person be
   subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or
   limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case, to be a witnesses
   against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty or property, without
   due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use
   without just compensation. Seventh Article:
   No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous
   crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in
   cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in
   actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be
   subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or
   limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness
   against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without
   due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use,
   without just compensation. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Fifth Amendment
   Ninth Article:
   In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
   speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the
   accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have
   compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have
   the assistance of counsel for his defence. Eighth Article:
   In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
   speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the
   accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have
   compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favour, and to have
   the assistance of counsel for his defence. Eighth Article:
   In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
   speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district
   wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
   been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature
   and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses
   against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his
   favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Sixth Amendment
   Tenth Article:
   The trial of all crimes (except in cases of impeachment, and in cases
   arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia when in actual
   service in time of War or public danger) shall be by an Impartial Jury
   of the Vicinage, with the requisite of unanimity for conviction, the
   right of challenge, and other accostomed [sic] requisites; and no
   person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherways [sic]
   infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment by a Grand Jury;
   but if a crime be committed in a place in the possession of an enemy,
   or in which an insurrection may prevail, the indictment and trial may
   by law be authorised in some other place within the same State. (see
   Seventh Article above)
   Eleventh Article:
   No appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States, shall be allowed,
   where the value in controversy shall not amount to one thousand
   dollars, nor shall any fact, triable by a Jury according to the course
   of the common law, be otherwise re-examinable, than according to the
   rules of common law. Ninth Article:
   In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
   twenty dollars, the right of trial by Jury shall be preserved, and no
   fact, tried by a Jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of
   the United States, than according to the rules of the common law. Ninth
   Article:
   In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
   twenty dollars, the right of trial by Jury shall be preserved, and no
   fact, tried by a Jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of
   the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.
   Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Seventh Amendment
   Twelfth Article:
   In suits at common law, the right of trial by Jury shall be preserved.
   (see Ninth Article above)
   Thirteenth Article:
   Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
   cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. Tenth Article:
   Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
   cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. Tenth Article:
   Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
   cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Eighth Amendment
   Fourteenth Article:
   No State shall infringe the right of trial by Jury in criminal cases,
   nor the rights of conscience, nor the freedom of speech, or of the
   press.
   Fifteenth Article:
   The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights, shall not be
   construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people. Eleventh
   Article:
   The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
   construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people. Eleventh
   Article:
   The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
   construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Ninth Amendment
   Sixteenth Article:
   The powers delegated by the Constitution to the government of the
   United States, shall be exercised as therein appropriated, so that the
   Legislative shall never exercise the powers vested in the Executive or
   Judicial; nor the Executive the powers vested in the Legislative or
   Judicial; nor the Judicial the powers vested in the Legislative or
   Executive.
   Seventeenth Article:
   The powers not delegated by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it, to
   the States, are reserved to the States respectively. Twelfth Article:
   The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
   prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States
   respectively, or to the people. Twelfth Article:
   The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
   prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States
   respectively, or to the people. Ratified:
   December 15, 1791
   Tenth Amendment

Ratification process

   The twelve articles of amendment approved by congress were officially
   submitted to the Legislatures of the several States for consideration
   on September 28, 1789. The following states ratified some or all of the
   amendments:^[58]^[59]
    1. New Jersey — November 20, 1789 • Articles One and Three–Twelve
       (Ratified Article Two on May 7, 1992)
    2. Maryland — December 19, 1789 • Articles One–Twelve
    3. North Carolina — December 22, 1789 • Articles One–Twelve
    4. South Carolina — January 19, 1790 • Articles One–Twelve
    5. New Hampshire — January 25, 1790 • Articles One and Three–Twelve
       (Ratified Article Two on March 7, 1985)
    6. Delaware — January 28, 1790 • Articles Two–Twelve
    7. New York — February 24, 1790 • Articles One and Three–Twelve
    8. Pennsylvania — March 10, 1790 • Articles One and Three–Twelve
    9. Rhode Island — June 7, 1790 • Articles One and Three–Twelve
       (Ratified Article Two on June 10, 1993)
   10. Vermont — November 3, 1791 • Articles One–Twelve
   11. Virginia — December 15, 1791 • Articles One–Twelve

   Having been approved by the requisite three–fourths of the several
   states, there being 14 States in the Union at the time (as Vermont had
   been admitted into the Union on March 4, 1791),^[56] the ratification
   of Articles Three–Twelve was completed and they became Amendments 1–10
   of the Constitution. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson certified
   their adoption on March 1, 1792.^[60]

   As they had not yet been approved by 11 of the 14 states, the
   ratification of Article One (ratified by 10) and Article Two (ratified
   by 6) remained incomplete. The ratification plateau they needed to
   reach soon rose to 12 of 15 states when Kentucky joined the Union (June
   1, 1792). On June 27, 1792, the Kentucky General Assembly ratified all
   12 amendments amendments, this action however, did not come to light
   until 1997.

   Article One, came within one state of the number needed to become
   adopted into the Constitution on two occasions between 1789 and 1803.
   Despite coming close to ratification early on, it has never received
   the approval of enough states to become part of the Constitution.^[57]
   As Congress did not attach a ratification time limit to the article, it
   is still technically pending before the states. Since no state has
   approved it since 1792, ratification by an additional 27 states would
   now be necessary for the article to be adopted.

   Article Two, initially ratified by seven states through 1792 (including
   Kentucky), was not ratified by another state for eighty years. The Ohio
   General Assembly ratified it on May 6, 1873 in protest of an unpopular
   Congressional pay raise.^[61] A century later, on March 6, 1978, the
   Wyoming Legislature also ratified the article.^[62] Gregory Watson, a
   University of Texas at Austin undergraduate student, started a new push
   for the article’s ratification with a letter-writing campaign to state
   legislatures.^[61] As a result, by May 1992, enough states had approved
   Article Two (38 of the 50 states in the Union) for it to become the
   Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution. The
   amendment's adoption was certified by Archivist of the United States
   Don W. Wilson and subsequently affirmed by a vote of Congress on May
   20, 1992.^[63]

   Three states did not complete action on the twelve articles of
   amendment when they were initially put before the states. Connecticut
   and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to
   ratify, while the two chambers of the Massachusetts General Court each
   ratified most of the amendments, but failed to reconcile their two
   lists or to send official notice to the Secretary of State of the ones
   they did agree upon.^[56] All three later ratified the Constitutional
   amendments originally known as Articles 3–12 as part of the 1939
   commemoration of the Bill of Rights' sesquicentennial: Massachusetts on
   March 2, Georgia on March 18, and Connecticut on April 19.^[56]
   Connecticut and Georgia would also later ratify Article Two, on May 13,
   1987 and February 2, 1988 respectively.

Application

   The Bill of Rights had little judicial impact for the first 150 years
   of its existence; in the words of Gordon S. Wood, "After ratification,
   most Americans promptly forgot about the first ten amendments to the
   Constitution."^[64] The Court made no important decisions protecting
   free speech rights, for example, until 1931.^[65] Historian Richard
   Labunski attributes the Bill's long legal dormancy to three factors:
   first, it took time for a "culture of tolerance" to develop that would
   support the Bill's provisions with judicial and popular will; second,
   the Supreme Court spent much of the 19th century focused on issues
   relating to intergovernmental balances of power; and third, the Bill
   initially only applied to the federal government, a restriction
   affirmed by Barron v. Baltimore (1833).^[66]^[67]^[68] In the twentieth
   century, however, most of the Bill's provisions were applied to the
   states via the Fourteenth Amendment—a process known as
   incorporation—beginning with the freedom of speech clause, in Gitlow v.
   New York (1925).^[69] In Talton v. Mayes (1896), the Court ruled that
   Constitutional protections, including the provisions of the Bill of
   Rights, do not apply to the actions of American Indian tribal
   governments.^[70]

First Amendment

   Main article: First Amendment to the United States Constitution

     Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
     or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom
     of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
     assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of
     grievances.^[71]

   The First Amendment prohibits the making of any law respecting an
   establishment of religion, impeding the free exercise of religion,
   abridging the freedom of speech, infringing on the freedom of the
   press, interfering with the right to peaceably assemble or prohibiting
   the petitioning for a governmental redress of grievances. Initially,
   the First Amendment applied only to laws enacted by Congress, and many
   of its provisions were interpreted more narrowly than they are
   today.^[72]

   In Everson v. Board of Education (1947), the Court drew on Thomas
   Jefferson's correspondence to call for "a wall of separation between
   church and State", though the precise boundary of this separation
   remains in dispute.^[72] Speech rights were expanded significantly in a
   series of 20th- and 21st-century court decisions that protected various
   forms of political speech, anonymous speech, campaign financing,
   pornography, and school speech; these rulings also defined a series of
   exceptions to First Amendment protections. The Supreme Court overturned
   English common law precedent to increase the burden of proof for
   defamation and libel suits, most notably in New York Times Co. v.
   Sullivan (1964).^[73] Commercial speech is less protected by the First
   Amendment than political speech, and is therefore subject to greater
   regulation.^[72]

   The Free Press Clause protects publication of information and opinions,
   and applies to a wide variety of media. In Near v. Minnesota
   (1931)^[74] and New York Times v. United States (1971),^[75] the
   Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment protected against prior
   restraint—pre-publication censorship—in almost all cases. The Petition
   Clause protects the right to petition all branches and agencies of
   government for action. In addition to the right of assembly guaranteed
   by this clause, the Court has also ruled that the amendment implicitly
   protects freedom of association.^[72]

Second Amendment

   Main article: Second Amendment to the United States Constitution

     A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free
     State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be
     infringed.^[71]

   The Second Amendment protects the right to keep and bear arms. The
   concept of a right to keep and bear arms existed within English common
   law long before the enactment of the Bill of Rights.^[76] Eighteenth
   century English jurist and judge Sir William Blackstone described this
   right as

     a public allowance under due restrictions, of the natural right of
     resistance and self-preservation, when the sanctions of society and
     laws are found insufficient to restrain the violence of
     oppression.^[77]

   First codified in the English Bill of Rights of 1689, this right was
   enshrined in fundamental laws of several states during the
   Revolutionary era, including the 1776 Virginia Declaration of Rights
   and the Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776.

   Long a controversial issue in American political, legal and social
   discourse, the Second Amendment has been at the heart of several
   Supreme Court decisions.
     * In United States v. Cruikshank (1875), the Court ruled that "[t]he
       right to bear arms is not granted by the Constitution; neither is
       it in any manner dependent upon that instrument for its existence.
       The Second Amendment means no more than that it shall not be
       infringed by Congress, and has no other effect than to restrict the
       powers of the National Government."^[78]

     * In United States v. Miller (1939), the Court ruled that the
       amendment "[protects arms that had a] reasonable relationship to
       the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia".^[79]

     * In District of Columbia v. Heller (2008), the Court ruled that the
       Second Amendment "codified a pre-existing right" and that it
       "protects an individual right to possess a firearm unconnected with
       service in a militia, and to use that arm for traditionally lawful
       purposes, such as self-defense within the home" but also stated
       that "the right is not unlimited. It is not a right to keep and
       carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for
       whatever purpose".^[80]

     * In McDonald v. Chicago (2010),^[81] the Court ruled that the Second
       Amendment limits state and local governments to the same extent
       that it limits the federal government.^[82]

Third Amendment

   Main article: Third Amendment to the United States Constitution

     No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house,
     without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a
     manner to be prescribed by law.^[71]

   The Third Amendment restricts the quartering of soldiers in private
   homes, in response to Quartering Acts passed by the British parliament
   during the Revolutionary War. The amendment is one of the least
   controversial of the Constitution, and, as of 2012^[update], has never
   been the primary basis of a Supreme Court decision.^[83]^[84]^[85]

Fourth Amendment

   Main article: Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution

     The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,
     papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures,
     shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon
     probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly
     describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be
     seized.^[71]

   The Fourth Amendment guards against unreasonable searches and seizures,
   along with requiring any warrant to be judicially sanctioned and
   supported by probable cause. It was adopted as a response to the abuse
   of the writ of assistance, which is a type of general search warrant,
   in the American Revolution. Search and seizure (including arrest) must
   be limited in scope according to specific information supplied to the
   issuing court, usually by a law enforcement officer who has sworn by
   it. The amendment is the basis for the exclusionary rule, which
   mandates that evidence obtained illegally cannot be introduced into a
   criminal trial.^[86] The amendment's interpretation has varied over
   time; its protections expanded under left-leaning courts such as that
   headed by Earl Warren and contracted under right-leaning courts such as
   that of William Rehnquist.^[87]

Fifth Amendment

   Main article: Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution

     No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise
     infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand
     Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the
     Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor
     shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in
     jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal
     case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life,
     liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private
     property be taken for public use, without just compensation.^[71]

   The Fifth Amendment protects against double jeopardy and
   self-incrimination and guarantees the rights to due process, grand jury
   screening of criminal indictments, and compensation for the seizure of
   private property under eminent domain. The amendment was the basis for
   the court's decision in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), which established
   that defendants must be informed of their rights to an attorney and
   against self-incrimination prior to interrogation by police.^[88]

Sixth Amendment

   Main article: Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution

     In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
     speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and
     district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district
     shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of
     the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the
     witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining
     witnesses in his favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for
     his defence.^[71]

   The Sixth Amendment establishes a number of rights of the defendant in
   a criminal trial:
     * The right to a speedy and public trial
     * The right to trial by an impartial jury
     * The right to be informed of criminal charges
     * The right to confront witnesses
     * The right to compel witnesses to appear in court
     * The right to assistance of counsel^[89]

   In Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), the Court ruled that the amendment
   guaranteed the right to legal representation in all felony prosecutions
   in both state and federal courts.^[89]

Seventh Amendment

   Main article: Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution

     In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
     twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and
     no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court
     of the United States, than according to the rules of the common
     law.^[71]

   The Seventh Amendment guarantees jury trials in federal civil cases
   that deal with claims of more than twenty dollars. It also prohibits
   judges from overruling findings of fact by juries in federal civil
   trials. In Colgrove v. Battin (1973), the Court ruled that the
   amendment's requirements could be fulfilled by a jury with a minimum of
   six members. The Seventh is one of the few parts of the Bill of Rights
   not to be incorporated (applied to the states).^[90]

Eighth Amendment

   Main article: Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution

     Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
     nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.^[71]

   The Eighth Amendment forbids the imposition of excessive bails or
   fines, though it leaves the term "excessive" open to
   interpretation.^[91]

   The most frequently litigated clause of the amendment is the last,
   which forbids cruel and unusual punishment.^[92]^[93] This clause was
   only occasionally applied by the Supreme Court prior to the 1970s,
   generally in cases dealing with means of execution. In Furman v.
   Georgia (1972), some members of the Court found capital punishment
   itself in violation of the amendment, arguing that the clause could
   reflect "evolving standards of decency" as public opinion changed;
   others found certain practices in capital trials to be unacceptably
   arbitrary, resulting in a majority decision that effectively halted
   executions in the United States for several years.^[94] Executions
   resumed following Gregg v. Georgia (1976), which found capital
   punishment to be constitutional if the jury was directed by concrete
   sentencing guidelines.^[94] The Court has also found that some poor
   prison conditions constitute cruel and unusual punishment, as in
   Estelle v. Gamble (1976).^[92]

Ninth Amendment

   Main article: Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution

     The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
     construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.^[71]

   The Ninth Amendment clarifies that the specific individual rights
   stated in the Constitution, particularly in the Bill of Rights, does
   not constitute an explicit and exhaustive listing of all individual
   rights possessed by the people, and cannot be used by the federal
   government to increase its powers in areas not stated. It was rarely
   cited before the second half of the 20th century, when it was used as a
   positive affirmation of a right not stated but nonetheless protected by
   the Constitution,^[95] the right to privacy. This right was, in turn,
   the foundation upon which the Supreme Court built decisions in several
   landmark cases: Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), which struck down a
   Connecticut law criminalizing the use of contraceptives; Roe v. Wade
   (1973), which overturned a Texas law making it a crime to assist a
   woman to get an abortion; and Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992), which
   invalidated a Pennsylvania law that required spousal awareness prior to
   obtaining an abortion.

Tenth Amendment

   Main article: Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution

     The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution,
     nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States
     respectively, or to the people.^[71]

   The Tenth Amendment reinforces the principles of separation of powers
   and federalism by providing that powers not granted to the federal
   government by the Constitution, nor prohibited to the states, are
   reserved to the states or the people. The amendment provides no new
   powers or rights to the states, but rather preserves their authority in
   all matters not specifically granted to the federal government.^[96]

Display and honoring of the Bill of Rights

   George Washington had fourteen handwritten copies of the Bill of Rights
   made, one for Congress and one for each of the original thirteen
   states.^[97] The copies for Georgia, Maryland, New York, and
   Pennsylvania went missing. The New York copy is thought to have been
   destroyed in a fire,^[98] whereas the Pennsylvania copy was taken by a
   soldier sometime in April 1865.^[99] Two unidentified copies of the
   missing four (thought to be the Georgia and Maryland copies) survive;
   one is in the National Archives,^[100]^[101] and the other is in the
   New York Public Library.^[102] North Carolina's copy was stolen by a
   Union soldier in April 1865 and returned to North Carolina in 2005 by
   FBI Special Agent Robert King Wittman.^[102]^[103]

   The National Archives and Records Administration copy of the Bill of
   Rights is on display in the Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom. The
   Rotunda itself was constructed in the 1950s and dedicated in 1952 by
   President Harry S. Truman, who said, "Only as these documents are
   reflected in the thoughts and acts of Americans, can they remain
   symbols of power that can move the world. That power is our faith in
   human liberty".^[104]

   After fifty years, signs of deterioration in the casing were noted,
   while the documents themselves appeared to be well preserved.^[105]
   Accordingly, the casing was updated and the Rotunda rededicated on
   September 17, 2003. In his dedicatory remarks, President George W. Bush
   stated, "The true [American] revolution was not to defy one earthly
   power, but to declare principles that stand above every earthly
   power—the equality of each person before God, and the responsibility of
   government to secure the rights of all."^[106] In 1941, President
   Franklin D. Roosevelt declared December 15 to be Bill of Rights Day,
   commemorating the 150th anniversary of the ratification of the Bill of
   Rights.^[107] In 1991, the Virginia copy of the Bill of Rights toured
   the country in honor of its bicentennial, visiting the capitals of all
   fifty states.^[108]

See also

   Portal icon United States portal
   Portal icon Law portal
   Portal icon Human rights portal
     * Four Freedoms
     * Institute of Bill of Rights Law
     * Second Bill of Rights
     * Taxpayer Bill of Rights
     * U.S. Patients' Bill of Rights
     * Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom
     * Anti-Federalist Papers

References

   Notes

    1. ^ Probably Robert Yates^[14]

   Citations

    1. ^ ^a ^b ^c Lloyd, Gordon. "Introduction to the Constitutional
       Convention". Teaching American History. Retrieved October 6, 2007.
    2. ^ Stewart, p. 47
    3. ^ Beeman, p. 59.
    4. ^ Beeman, p. 341.
    5. ^ ^a ^b Beeman, p. 343.
    6. ^ Rakove, p. 327
    7. ^ ^a ^b Stewart, p. 226
    8. ^ Rakove, p. 288
    9. ^ Beeman, p. 363
   10. ^ "Federal Convention, Resolution and Letter to the Continental
       Congress". The Founders' Constitution. The University of Chicago
       Press. p. 195, Volume 1, Chapter 6, Document 11. Retrieved March 6,
       2014.
   11. ^ Labunski, p. 20
   12. ^ Labunski, p. 63
   13. ^ "Jefferson's letter to Madison, March 15, 1789". The Founders'
       Constitution. Retrieved March 9, 2006.
   14. ^ Hamilton et al., p. 436
   15. ^ Brutus, p. 376
   16. ^ Brutus, p. 377
   17. ^ Rakove, p. 325
   18. ^ Labunski, p. 62
   19. ^ ^a ^b ^c Hamilton, Alexander. Federalist Papers, #84. "On
       opposition to a Bill of Rights.". The Founders' Constitution.
       University of Chicago Press. Retrieved February 28, 2006.
   20. ^ Rakove, p. 323
   21. ^ Labunski, pp. 59–60
   22. ^ Beeman, p. 388
   23. ^ Beeman, pp. 389–390
   24. ^ Beeman, p. 390
   25. ^ ^a ^b Maier, p. 431.
   26. ^ Labunksi, pp. 113–115
   27. ^ ^a ^b Brookhiser, p. 80
   28. ^ Maier, p. 430.
   29. ^ Maier, p. 429.
   30. ^ Maier, p. 433.
   31. ^ Brookhiser, p. 76
   32. ^ Labunski, pp. 159, 174
   33. ^ Labunski, p. 161
   34. ^ Labunski, p. 162
   35. ^ Brookhiser, p. 77
   36. ^ Labunski, p. 192
   37. ^ Labunski, p. 188
   38. ^ Gordon Lloyd. "Anticipating the Bill of Rights in the First
       Congress". TeachingAmericanHistory.org. Ashland, Ohio: The Ashbrook
       Center at Ashland University. Retrieved June 23, 2014.
   39. ^ ^a ^b Labunski, p. 198
   40. ^ Labunski, p. 199
   41. ^ ^a ^b Madison introduced "amendments culled mainly from state
       constitutions and state ratifying convention proposals, especially
       Virginia's." Levy, p. 35
   42. ^ Virginia Declaration of Rights. Library of Congress. Accessed
       July 12, 2013.
   43. ^ ^a ^b Gordon Lloyd. "The Four Stages of Approval of the Bill of
       Rights in Congress and the States". TeachingAmericanHistory.org.
       Ashland, Ohio: The Ashbrook Center at Ashland University. Retrieved
       June 23, 2014.
   44. ^ Labunski, pp. 203–05
   45. ^ Labunski, p. 215
   46. ^ Labunski, p. 201
   47. ^ Brookhiser, p. 81
   48. ^ Labunski, p. 217
   49. ^ Labunski, pp. 218–20
   50. ^ Labunski, p. 235
   51. ^ Labunski, p. 237
   52. ^ Labunski, p. 221
   53. ^ Adamson, Barry (2008). Freedom of Religion, the First Amendment,
       and the Supreme Court: How the Court Flunked History. Pelican
       Publishing. p. 93.
   54. ^ Graham, John Remington (2009). Free, Sovereign, and Independent
       States: The Intended Meaning of the American Constitution. Foreword
       by Laura Tesh. Footnote 54, pp. 193–194.
   55. ^ Wood, p. 71
   56. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Levy, Leonard W. (1986). "Bill of Rights (United
       States)". Encyclopedia of the American Constitution.
       – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Retrieved July 16,
       2013.
   57. ^ ^a ^b Wood, p. 69
   58. ^ "The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and
       Interpretation, Centennial Edition, Interim Edition: Analysis of
       Cases Decided by the Supreme Court of the United States to June 26,
       2013". Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 2013.
       p. 25. Retrieved April 13, 2014.
   59. ^ James J. Kilpatrick, ed. (1961). The Constitution of the United
       States and Amendments Thereto. Virginia Commission on
       Constitutional Government. p. 64.
   60. ^ Labunski, p. 255
   61. ^ ^a ^b Dean, John W. (September 27, 2002). "The Telling Tale of
       the Twenty-Seventh Amendment". FindLaw. Retrieved June 23, 2014.
   62. ^ JusticeLearning
   63. ^ Bernstein, Richard B. (2000). "Twenty-Seventh Amendment".
       Encyclopedia of the American Constitution.  – via HighBeam Research
       (subscription required). Retrieved July 16, 2013.
   64. ^ Wood, p. 72
   65. ^ Labunski, p. 258
   66. ^ Labunski, pp. 258–59
   67. ^ "Barron v. Mayor & City Council of Baltimore - 32 U.S. 243
       (1833)". Justia.com. Retrieved July 11, 2013.
   68. ^ Levy, Leonard W. (January 1, 2000). "BARRON v. CITY OF BALTIMORE
       7 Peters 243 (1833)". Encyclopedia of the American Constitution.
       – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Retrieved July 11,
       2013.
   69. ^ Labunski, p. 259
   70. ^ Deloria, Vine Jr. (2000). "American Indians and the
       Constitution". Encyclopedia of the American Constitution.
       – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Retrieved July 16,
       2013.
   71. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e ^f ^g ^h ^i ^j "Bill of Rights Transcript".
       Archives.gov. Retrieved May 15, 2010.
   72. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Cox, Archibald (1986). "First Amendment".
       Encyclopedia of the American Constitution.  – via HighBeam Research
       (subscription required). Retrieved July 16, 2013.
   73. ^ New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964)
   74. ^ Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697 (1931)
   75. ^ New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. 713 (1971)
   76. ^ McAffee, Thomas B.; Michael J. Quinlan (March 1997). "Bringing
       Forward The Right To Keep And Bear Arms: Do Text, History, Or
       Precedent Stand In The Way?". North Carolina Law Review: 781.
   77. ^ Blackstone, William (1765–1769). Commentaries on the Laws of
       England: Book the First, of the Rights of Persons. Oxford: the
       Clarendon Press. pp. 143–144.
   78. ^ 92 U.S. 542 (1875)
   79. ^ 307 U.S. 174 (1939)
   80. ^ 554 U.S. 570 (2008)
   81. ^ 561 U.S. 3025 (2010)
   82. ^ Liptak, Adam (June 28, 2010). "Justices Extend Firearm Rights in
       5-to-4 Ruling". The New York Times. Retrieved December 17, 2012.
   83. ^ "The Third Amendment". Revolutionary War and Beyond. Retrieved 26
       February 2014.
   84. ^ Mahoney, Dennis J. (1986). "Third Amendment". Encyclopedia of the
       American Constitution.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription
       required). Retrieved July 15, 2013.
   85. ^ "Third Amendment". U*X*L Encyclopedia of U.S. History.
       – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2009.
       Retrieved July 15, 2013.
   86. ^ "Exclusionary rule". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved July 15,
       2013.
   87. ^ "Fourth Amendment". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved July 15,
       2013.
   88. ^ "Fifth Amendment". Gale Encyclopedia of Everyday Law.
       – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2006.
       Retrieved July 15, 2013.
   89. ^ ^a ^b "The Sixth Amendment". Constitutional Amendments: From
       Freedom of Speech to Flag Burning.  – via HighBeam Research
       (subscription required). January 1, 2008. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
   90. ^ Mahoney, Dennis J. (1986). "Seventh Amendment". Encyclopedia of
       the American Constitution.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription
       required). Retrieved July 15, 2013.
   91. ^ Bessler, p. 194
   92. ^ ^a ^b Krantz, Sheldon (1986). "Cruel and Unusual Punishment".
       Encyclopedia of the American Constitution.  – via HighBeam Research
       (subscription required). Retrieved July 16, 2013.
   93. ^ "U*X*L Encyclopedia of U.S. History". UXL Encyclopedia of
       American History. January 1, 2009. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
   94. ^ ^a ^b Weisberg, Robert (1986). "Capital Punishment". Encyclopedia
       of the American Constitution.  – via HighBeam Research
       (subscription required). Retrieved July 16, 2013.
   95. ^ "The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and
       Interpretation, Centennial Edition, Interim Edition: Alalysis of
       Cases Decided by the Supreme Court of the United States to June 26,
       2013". Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 2013.
       p. 1738. Retrieved April 13, 2014.
   96. ^ "Tenth Amendment". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved July 19,
       2013.
   97. ^ Frieden, Terry (March 19, 2003). "FBI recovers original copy of
       Bill of Rights". CNN. Retrieved April 25, 2008.
   98. ^ "Background on the Bill of Rights and the New York Ratification
       of the Bill of Rights". U.S. National Archives and Records
       Administration. 2007. Retrieved July 28, 2008.
   99. ^ "History - History in Custody: The U.S. Marshals Service Takes
       Possession of North Carolina's Copy of the Bill of Rights". U.S.
       Marshals Service. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
   100. ^ "Primary Documents in American History: The Bill of Rights". The
       Library of Congress.
   101. ^ "History of the Bill of Rights" However, the Maryland Archives
       report that the unknown National Archives copy {pictured above in
       Wikipedia article} is the Maryland Copy}
   102. ^ ^a ^b "Bill of Rights Returns Home". North Carolina Office of
       Archives and History. 2005. Retrieved April 25, 2008.
   103. ^ "The U.S. Marshals Service Takes Possession of North Carolina's
       Copy of the Bill of Rights". U.S. Marshals Service. Retrieved July
       28, 2008.
   104. ^ "Truman's Remarks in the Rotunda, December 1952". March 14,
       2006.
   105. ^ Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler and Catherine Nicholson, "A New Era
       Begins for the Charters of Freedom.". March 14, 2006.  Prologue,
       Fall 2003.
   106. ^ For Know-It-Alls (2008). The United States Bill of Rights for
       Know-It-Alls. Filiquarian Publishing, LLC. p. 27. ISBN 1599862255.
   107. ^ Grier, Peter (December 15, 2009). "Bill of Rights Day: what
       Obama says about it". Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved July 10,
       2013.
   108. ^ "Bill of Rights Tour Opens in Kansas City". The Nevada Daily
       Mail. September 18, 1991. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

   Bibliography

     * Amar, Akhil Reed (1998). The Bill of Rights. Yale University Press.
     * Beeman, Richard (2009). Plain, Honest Men: The Making of the
       American Constitution. Random House.
     * Bessler, John D. (2012). Cruel and Unusual: The American Death
       Penalty and the Founders' Eighth Amendment. UPNE.
     * Brookhiser, Richard (2011) James Madison. Basic Books.
     * Brutus (1787) "To the Citizens of the State of New York". In The
       Complete Anti-Federalist, Volume 1 (2008). Ed. Herbert J. Storing.
       University of Chicago Press.
     * Hamilton, Alexander, Madison, James, and Jay, John (2003) The
       Federalist: With Letters of Brutus. Ed. Terence Ball. Cambridge
       University Press.
     * Labunski, Richard E. (2006). James Madison and the struggle for the
       Bill of Rights. Oxford University Press.
     * Levy, Leonard W. (1999). Origins of the Bill of Rights. Yale
       University Press.
     * Maier, Pauline (2010). Ratification: The People Debate the
       Constitution, 1787–1788. Simon and Schuster.
     * Rakove, Jack N. (1996). Original Meanings. Alfred A. Knopf.
     * Stewart, David O. (2007). The Summer of 1787. Simon and Schuster.
     * Wood, Gordon S. (2009). Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early
       Republic, 1789–1815. Oxford University Press.

Further reading

     * Bodenhamer, David J.; James W. Ely (May 2008). The Bill of Rights
       in modern America. Indiana University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-253-21991-6.
     * Schwartz, Bernard (January 1, 1992). The great rights of mankind: a
       history of the American Bill of Rights. Rowman & Littlefield.
       ISBN 978-0-945612-28-5.
     * Smith, Rich (July 2, 2007). The Bill of Rights: Defining Our
       Freedoms. ABDO. ISBN 978-1-59928-913-7.
     * Stair, Nancy L. (January 2003). The Bill of Rights: a primary
       source investigation into the first ten amendments of the
       Constitution. The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 53.
       ISBN 978-0-8239-3800-1.

External links

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Bill of Rights.
   Wikisource has original text related to this article:
   United States Bill of Rights
   Wikiquote has quotations related to: United States Bill of Rights
     * National Archives: The full text of the United States Bill of
       Rights
     * Footnote.com (partners with the National Archives): Online viewer
       with High-resolution image of the original document
     * Library of Congress: Bill of Rights and related resources
     * Alexander Hamilton, Federalist, no. 84, 575–81, on opposition to
       the Bill of Rights
     * TeachingAmericanHistory.org - Bill of Rights
     * United States Bill of Rights at Project Gutenberg


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Constitution
   Text (via Wikisource)
     * Preamble and Articles I-VII
     * Amendments 1-10
     * Amendments 11-27
     * Unsuccessful Proposed Amendments
     * Debates in State Conventions on the Adoption of the Constitution

   Preamble & Articles
     * Preamble
     * I
     * II
     * III
     * IV
     * V
     * VI
     * VII

   Amendments
     Ratified
                 * 1
                 * 2
                 * 3
                 * 4
                 * 5
                 * 6
                 * 7
                 * 8
                 * 9
                 * 10
                 * 11
                 * 12
                 * 13
                 * 14
                 * 15
                 * 16
                 * 17
                 * 18
                 * 19
                 * 20
                 * 21
                 * 22
                 * 23
                 * 24
                 * 25
                 * 26
                 * 27

     Pending
                 * Congressional Apportionment
                 * Titles of Nobility
                 * Corwin (State Domestic Institutions)
                 * Child Labor

   Unsuccessful
                 * Equal Rights
                 * District of Columbia Voting Rights

     * List of Constitutional Amendments
     * Bill of Rights (Amendments 1-10)
     * Reconstruction Amendments (Amendments 13-15)

     * Amendment proposal in Congress
     * Conventions to propose amendments
     * State ratifying conventions

   Formation
     * History
     * Articles of Confederation
     * Mount Vernon Conference
     * Annapolis Convention
     * Philadelphia Convention
          + Virginia Plan
          + New Jersey Plan
          + Connecticut Compromise
          + Three-Fifths Compromise
          + Committee of Detail
          + Signers
          + Independence Hall
          + Syng inkstand
     * Federalist Papers
     * Anti-Federalist Papers
     * Massachusetts Compromise
     * Virginia Ratifying Convention
     * Drafting and ratification timeline

   Clauses
     * Appointments
     * Appropriations
     * Assistance of Counsel
     * Bill of credit
     * Case or Controversy
     * Citizenship
     * Commerce
     * Compact
     * Compulsory Process
     * Confrontation
     * Contract
     * Copyright and Patent
     * Double Jeopardy
     * Due Process
     * Equal Protection
     * Establishment
     * Exceptions
     * Excessive Bail
     * Ex post facto
     * Extradition
     * Free Exercise
     * Free Speech
     * Fugitive Slave
     * Full Faith and Credit
     * General Welfare
     * Guarantee
     * Impeachment
     * Ineligibility (Emolument)
     * Militia
     * Natural-born citizen
     * Necessary and Proper
     * No Religious Test
     * Origination
     * Petition
     * Postal
     * Presentment
     * Privileges and Immunities
     * Privileges or Immunities
     * Recommendation
     * Self-Incrimination
     * Speech or Debate
     * Speedy Trial
     * State of the Union
     * Supremacy
     * Suspension
     * Take Care
     * Takings
     * Taxing and Spending
     * Territorial
     * Title of Nobility
     * Treaty
     * Trial by Jury
     * Vesting
     * Vicinage
     * War Powers
     * List of clauses

   Interpretation
     * Concurrent powers
     * Congressional enforcement
     * Constitutional law
     * Criminal procedure
     * Criminal sentencing
     * Dormant Commerce Clause
     * Enumerated powers
     * Executive privilege
     * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
     * Judicial review
     * Nondelegation doctrine
     * Preemption
     * Saxbe fix
     * Separation of church and state
     * Separation of powers
     * Taxation power
     * Unitary executive theory

   US Government Portal • Law Portal

     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


     * v
     * t
     * e

   James Madison
     * March 16, 1751 – June 28, 1836

     * 4th President of the United States (1809–1817)
     * 5th U.S. Secretary of State (1801–1809)
     * United States House of Representatives (1789–1797)
     * Congress of the Confederation (1781–1783)
     * Virginia House of Delegates (1776–1779, 1784–1786)

   "Father of the
   Constitution"
     * 1786 Annapolis Convention
     * Constitutional Convention
     * Virginia Plan
     * Constitution of the United States
     * United States Bill of Rights
          + 27th amendment
     * The Federalist Papers
          + written by Madison
          + No. 10
          + No. 51
     * Virginia Ratifying Convention
     * Constitution drafting and ratification timeline
     * Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787
     * Founding Fathers

   Presidency
     * First inauguration
     * Second inauguration
     * Tecumseh's War
          + Battle of Tippecanoe
     * War of 1812
          + origins
          + Burning of Washington
          + The Octagon House
          + Treaty of Ghent
          + results
     * Second Barbary War
     * Era of Good Feelings
     * Second Bank of the United States
     * State of the Union Address (1810
     * 1814
     * 1815
     * 1816)
     * Cabinet
     * Federal judiciary appointments
     * Seven Buildings residence

   Other noted
   accomplisments
     * Democratic-Republican Party
          + First Party System
          + republicanism
     * Supervised the Louisiana Purchase
     * Library of Congress
     * Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions
     * Report of 1800
     * Residence Act
          + Compromise of 1790

   Other writings
     * The Papers of James Madison

   Life
     * Early life and career
     * Belle Grove Plantation, birthplace
     * Montpelier

   Elections
     * U.S. House of Representatives election, 1789
     * 1790
     * 1792
     * 1794
     * U.S. presidential election, 1808
     * 1812

   Legacy and
   popular culture
     * James Madison Memorial Building
     * James Madison University
     * Madison Square
     * Madison River
     * Madison, Wisconsin
     * Madison Street
     * U.S. postage stamps
     * James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation
     * James Madison Freedom of Information Award
     * James Madison Award
     * James Madison Institute
     * A More Perfect Union (1989 film)
     * Liberty's Kids (2002 miniseries)

   Family
     * Dolley Madison (wife)
     * John Payne Todd (stepson)
     * James Madison, Sr. (father)
     * Nelly Conway Madison (mother)
     * Ambrose Madison (grandfather)
     * James Madison (cousin)
     * George Madison (second-cousin)
     * Thomas Madison (second-cousin)
     * John Madison (great-grandfather)
     * Lucy Washington (sister-in-law)

   Related
     * American Enlightenment
     * Marbury v. Madison
     * National Gazette
     * Paul Jennings
     * Madisonian Model
     * American Philosophical Society
     * The American Museum magazine
     * Virginia dynasty

   US Presidency Portal • American Revolutionary War Portal
     * ← Thomas Jefferson
     * James Monroe →

     * Commons page Commons
     * Wikipedia book Book:Federalist Papers
     * Wikibooks page Wikibooks
     * Wikiquote page Wikiquote
     * Wikisource page Wikisource

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Bill_of_Rights
   &oldid=624037004"
   Categories:
     * 1st United States Congress
     * 1791 in American politics
     * 1791 in law
     * American Enlightenment
     * History of the United States (1789–1849)
     * James Madison
     * National human rights instruments
     * Official documents of the United States
     * Presidency of George Washington
     * United States Constitution
     * Amendments to the United States Constitution

   Hidden categories:
     * Subscription required using via
     * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
     * Good articles
     * Use mdy dates from December 2012
     * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
     * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012
     * All articles containing potentially dated statements
     * Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * View source
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Azərbaycanca
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Deutsch
     * Eesti
     * Ελληνικά
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 한국어
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Ido
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Íslenska
     * עברית
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * සිංහල
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * தமிழ்
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 3 September 2014 at 17:17.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
