   #alternate Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia Atom feed

United States Declaration of Independence

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Page semi-protected
                  United States Declaration of Independence
   United States Declaration of Independence.jpg
   1823 facsimile of the engrossed copy
     Created   June–July, 1776
    Ratified   July 4, 1776
    Location   Engrossed copy: National Archives
               Rough draft: Library of Congress
    Author(s)  Thomas Jefferson et al. (Engrosser: Probably Timothy Matlack)
   Signatories 56 delegates to the Continental Congress
     Purpose   To announce and explain separation from Great Britain^[1]

   The Declaration of Independence is the usual name of a statement
   adopted by the Continental Congress on July 4, 1776, which announced
   that the thirteen American colonies, then at war with Great Britain,
   regarded themselves as thirteen newly independent sovereign states, and
   no longer a part of the British Empire. Instead they formed a new
   nation—the United States of America. John Adams was a leader in pushing
   for independence, which was unanimously approved on July 2. A committee
   of five had already drafted the formal declaration, to be ready when
   Congress voted on independence. The term "Declaration of Independence"
   is not used in the document itself.

   Adams persuaded the committee to select Thomas Jefferson to compose the
   original draft of the document,^[2] which congress would edit to
   produce the final version. The Declaration was ultimately a formal
   explanation of why Congress had voted on July 2 to declare independence
   from Great Britain, more than a year after the outbreak of the American
   Revolutionary War. The national birthday, Independence Day, is
   celebrated on July 4, although Adams wanted July 2.

   After ratifying the text on July 4, Congress issued the Declaration of
   Independence in several forms. It was initially published as the
   printed Dunlap broadside that was widely distributed and read to the
   public. The source copy used for this printing has been lost, and may
   have been a copy in Thomas Jefferson's hand.^[3] Jefferson's original
   draft, complete with changes made by John Adams and Benjamin Franklin,
   and Jefferson's notes of changes made by Congress, are preserved at the
   Library of Congress. The most famous version of the Declaration, a
   signed copy that is popularly regarded as the official document, is
   displayed at the National Archives in Washington, D.C. This engrossed
   copy was ordered by Congress on July 19, and signed primarily on August
   2.^[4]^[5]

   The sources and interpretation of the Declaration have been the subject
   of much scholarly inquiry. The Declaration justified the independence
   of the United States by listing colonial grievances against King George
   III, and by asserting certain natural and legal rights, including a
   right of revolution. Having served its original purpose in announcing
   independence, references to the text of the Declaration were few for
   the next four score years. Abraham Lincoln made it the centerpiece of
   his rhetoric (as in the Gettysburg Address of 1863), and his policies.
   Since then, it has become a well-known statement on human rights,
   particularly its second sentence:

     We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
     equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
     unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the
     pursuit of Happiness.

   This has been called "one of the best-known sentences in the English
   language",^[6] containing "the most potent and consequential words in
   American history".^[7] The passage came to represent a moral standard
   to which the United States should strive. This view was notably
   promoted by Abraham Lincoln, who considered the Declaration to be the
   foundation of his political philosophy, and argued that the Declaration
   is a statement of principles through which the United States
   Constitution should be interpreted.^[8]

   It provided inspiration to numerous national declarations of
   independence throughout the world. Historian David Armitage, after
   examining the influence of the American "Declaration" on over 100 other
   declarations of independence, says:

          The American Revolution was the first outbreak of the contagion
          of sovereignty that has swept the world in the centuries since
          1776. Its influence spread first to the Low Countries and then
          to the Caribbean, Spanish America, the Balkans, West Africa, and
          Central Europe in the decades up to 1848.... Declarations of
          independence were among the primary symptoms of this contagion
          of sovereignty.^[9]

Contents

     * 1 Background
          + 1.1 Congress convenes
     * 2 Toward independence
          + 2.1 Revising instructions
          + 2.2 May 15 preamble
          + 2.3 Lee's resolution and the final push
     * 3 Draft and adoption
     * 4 Annotated text of the engrossed Declaration
     * 5 Influences
     * 6 Signing
     * 7 Publication and reaction
     * 8 History of the documents
     * 9 Legacy
          + 9.1 Influence in other countries
          + 9.2 Revival of interest
          + 9.3 Slavery and the Declaration
          + 9.4 Lincoln and the Declaration
          + 9.5 Women's suffrage and the Declaration
          + 9.6 Legacy
     * 10 References
     * 11 Bibliography
     * 12 External links

Background

   Thomas Jefferson, the principal author of the Declaration

     Believe me, dear Sir: there is not in the British empire a man who
     more cordially loves a union with Great Britain than I do. But, by
     the God that made me, I will cease to exist before I yield to a
     connection on such terms as the British Parliament propose; and in
     this, I think I speak the sentiments of America.

   —Thomas Jefferson, November 29, 1775^[10]

   By the time the Declaration of Independence was adopted in July 1776,
   the Thirteen Colonies and Great Britain had been at war for more than a
   year. Relations between the colonies and the mother country had been
   deteriorating since the end of the Seven Years' War in 1763. The war
   had plunged the British government deep into debt, and so Parliament
   enacted a series of measures to increase tax revenue from the colonies.
   Parliament believed that these acts, such as the Stamp Act of 1765 and
   the Townshend Acts of 1767, were a legitimate means of having the
   colonies pay their fair share of the costs to keep the colonies in the
   British Empire.^[11]

   Many colonists, however, had developed a different conception of the
   empire. Because the colonies were not directly represented in
   Parliament, colonists argued that Parliament had no right to levy taxes
   upon them. This tax dispute was part of a larger divergence between
   British and American interpretations of the British Constitution and
   the extent of Parliament's authority in the colonies.^[12] The orthodox
   British view, dating from the Glorious Revolution of 1688, was that
   Parliament was the supreme authority throughout the empire, and so by
   definition anything Parliament did was constitutional.^[13] In the
   colonies, however, the idea had developed that the British Constitution
   recognized certain fundamental rights that no government—not even
   Parliament—could violate.^[14] After the Townshend Acts, some essayists
   even began to question whether Parliament had any legitimate
   jurisdiction in the colonies at all.^[15] Anticipating the arrangement
   of the British Commonwealth,^[16] by 1774 American writers such as
   Samuel Adams, James Wilson, and Thomas Jefferson were arguing that
   Parliament was the legislature of Great Britain only, and that the
   colonies, which had their own legislatures, were connected to the rest
   of the empire only through their allegiance to the Crown.^[17]

Congress convenes

   The issue of Parliament's authority in the colonies became a crisis
   after Parliament passed the Coercive Acts in 1774 to punish the
   Province of Massachusetts for the Boston Tea Party of 1773. Many
   colonists saw the Coercive Acts as a violation of the British
   Constitution and thus a threat to the liberties of all of British
   America. In September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened in
   Philadelphia to coordinate a response. Congress organized a boycott of
   British goods and petitioned the king for repeal of the acts. These
   measures were unsuccessful because King George III and the ministry of
   Prime Minister Lord North were determined not to retreat on the
   question of parliamentary supremacy. As the king wrote to North in
   November 1774, "blows must decide whether they are to be subject to
   this country or independent".^[18]

   Even after fighting in the American Revolutionary War began at
   Lexington and Concord in April 1775, most colonists still hoped for
   reconciliation with Great Britain.^[19] When the Second Continental
   Congress convened at the Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia in
   May 1775, some delegates hoped for eventual independence, but no one
   yet advocated declaring it.^[20] Although many colonists no longer
   believed that Parliament had any sovereignty over them, they still
   professed loyalty to King George, whom they hoped would intercede on
   their behalf. They were to be disappointed: in late 1775, the king
   rejected Congress's second petition, issued a Proclamation of
   Rebellion, and announced before Parliament on October 26 that he was
   considering "friendly offers of foreign assistance" to suppress the
   rebellion.^[21] A pro-American minority in Parliament warned that the
   government was driving the colonists toward independence.^[22]

Toward independence

   In January 1776, just as it became clear in the colonies that the king
   was not inclined to act as a conciliator, Thomas Paine's pamphlet
   Common Sense was published.^[23] Paine, who had only recently arrived
   in the colonies from England, argued in favor of colonial independence,
   advocating republicanism as an alternative to monarchy and hereditary
   rule.^[24] Common Sense introduced no new ideas,^[25] and probably had
   little direct effect on Congress's thinking about independence; its
   importance was in stimulating public debate on a topic that few had
   previously dared to openly discuss.^[26] Public support for separation
   from Great Britain steadily increased after the publication of Paine's
   enormously popular pamphlet.^[27]
   The Assembly Room in Philadelphia's Independence Hall, where the Second
   Continental Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence

   Although some colonists still held out hope for reconciliation,
   developments in early 1776 further strengthened public support for
   independence. In February 1776, colonists learned of Parliament's
   passage of the Prohibitory Act, which established a blockade of
   American ports and declared American ships to be enemy vessels. John
   Adams, a strong supporter of independence, believed that Parliament had
   effectively declared American independence before Congress had been
   able to. Adams labeled the Prohibitory Act the "Act of Independency",
   calling it "a compleat Dismemberment of the British Empire".^[28]
   Support for declaring independence grew even more when it was confirmed
   that King George had hired German mercenaries to use against his
   American subjects.^[29]

   Despite this growing popular support for independence, Congress lacked
   the clear authority to declare it. Delegates had been elected to
   Congress by thirteen different governments—which included extralegal
   conventions, ad hoc committees, and elected assemblies—and were bound
   by the instructions given to them. Regardless of their personal
   opinions, delegates could not vote to declare independence unless their
   instructions permitted such an action.^[30] Several colonies, in fact,
   expressly prohibited their delegates from taking any steps towards
   separation from Great Britain, while other delegations had instructions
   that were ambiguous on the issue.^[31] As public sentiment for
   separation from Great Britain grew, advocates of independence sought to
   have the Congressional instructions revised. For Congress to declare
   independence, a majority of delegations would need authorization to
   vote for independence, and at least one colonial government would need
   to specifically instruct (or grant permission for) its delegation to
   propose a declaration of independence in Congress. Between April and
   July 1776, a "complex political war"^[32] was waged to bring this
   about.^[33]

Revising instructions

   In the campaign to revise Congressional instructions, many Americans
   formally expressed their support for separation from Great Britain in
   what were effectively state and local declarations of independence.
   Historian Pauline Maier identified more than ninety such declarations
   that were issued throughout the Thirteen Colonies from April to July
   1776.^[34] These "declarations" took a variety of forms. Some were
   formal, written instructions for Congressional delegations, such as the
   Halifax Resolves of April 12, with which North Carolina became the
   first colony to explicitly authorize its delegates to vote for
   independence.^[35] Others were legislative acts that officially ended
   British rule in individual colonies, such as on May 4, when the Rhode
   Island legislature became the first to declare its independence from
   Great Britain.^[36] Many "declarations" were resolutions adopted at
   town or county meetings that offered support for independence. A few
   came in the form of jury instructions, such as the statement issued on
   April 23, 1776, by Chief Justice William Henry Drayton of South
   Carolina: "the law of the land authorizes me to declare...that George
   the Third, King of Great Britain...has no authority over us, and we owe
   no obedience to him."^[37] Most of these declarations are now obscure,
   having been overshadowed by the declaration approved by Congress on
   July 4.^[38]

   Some colonies held back from endorsing independence. Resistance was
   centered in the middle colonies of New York, New Jersey, Maryland,
   Pennsylvania, and Delaware.^[39] Advocates of independence saw
   Pennsylvania as the key: if that colony could be converted to the
   pro-independence cause, it was believed that the others would
   follow.^[39] On May 1, however, opponents of independence retained
   control of the Pennsylvania Assembly in a special election that had
   focused on the question of independence.^[40] In response, on May 10
   Congress passed a resolution, which had been promoted by John Adams and
   Richard Henry Lee, calling on colonies without a "government sufficient
   to the exigencies of their affairs" to adopt new governments.^[41] The
   resolution passed unanimously, and was even supported by Pennsylvania's
   John Dickinson, the leader of the anti-independence faction in
   Congress, who believed that it did not apply to his colony.^[42]

May 15 preamble

   This Day the Congress has passed the most important Resolution, that
   ever was taken in America.
   —John Adams, May 15, 1776^[43]

   As was the custom, Congress appointed a committee to draft a preamble
   to explain the purpose of the resolution. John Adams wrote the
   preamble, which stated that because King George had rejected
   reconciliation and was hiring foreign mercenaries to use against the
   colonies, "it is necessary that the exercise of every kind of authority
   under the said crown should be totally suppressed".^[44] Adams's
   preamble was meant to encourage the overthrow of the governments of
   Pennsylvania and Maryland, which were still under proprietary
   governance.^[45] Congress passed the preamble on May 15 after several
   days of debate, but four of the middle colonies voted against it, and
   the Maryland delegation walked out in protest.^[46] Adams regarded his
   May 15 preamble effectively as an American declaration of independence,
   although a formal declaration would still have to be made.^[47]

Lee's resolution and the final push

   On the same day that Congress passed Adams's radical preamble, the
   Virginia Convention set the stage for a formal Congressional
   declaration of independence. On May 15, the Convention instructed
   Virginia's congressional delegation "to propose to that respectable
   body to declare the United Colonies free and independent States,
   absolved from all allegiance to, or dependence upon, the Crown or
   Parliament of Great Britain".^[48] In accordance with those
   instructions, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia presented a three-part
   resolution to Congress on June 7.^[49] The motion, which was seconded
   by John Adams, called on Congress to declare independence, form foreign
   alliances, and prepare a plan of colonial confederation. The part of
   the resolution relating to declaring independence read:

     Resolved, that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be,
     free and independent States, that they are absolved from all
     allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection
     between them and the State of Great Britain is, and ought to be,
     totally dissolved.^[50]

   Lee's resolution met with resistance in the ensuing debate. Opponents
   of the resolution, while conceding that reconciliation with Great
   Britain was unlikely, argued that declaring independence was premature,
   and that securing foreign aid should take priority.^[51] Advocates of
   the resolution countered that foreign governments would not intervene
   in an internal British struggle, and so a formal declaration of
   independence was needed before foreign aid was possible. All Congress
   needed to do, they insisted, was to "declare a fact which already
   exists".^[52] Delegates from Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey,
   Maryland, and New York were still not yet authorized to vote for
   independence, however, and some of them threatened to leave Congress if
   the resolution were adopted. Congress therefore voted on June 10 to
   postpone further discussion of Lee's resolution for three weeks.^[53]
   Until then, Congress decided that a committee should prepare a document
   announcing and explaining independence in the event that Lee's
   resolution was approved when it was brought up again in July.

   Support for a Congressional declaration of independence was
   consolidated in the final weeks of June 1776. On June 14, the
   Connecticut Assembly instructed its delegates to propose independence,
   and the following day the legislatures of New Hampshire and Delaware
   authorized their delegates to declare independence.^[54] In
   Pennsylvania, political struggles ended with the dissolution of the
   colonial assembly, and on June 18 a new Conference of Committees under
   Thomas McKean authorized Pennsylvania's delegates to declare
   independence.^[55] On June 15, the Provincial Congress of New Jersey,
   which had been governing the province since January 1776, resolved that
   Royal Governor William Franklin was "an enemy to the liberties of this
   country" and had him arrested.^[56] On June 21, they chose new
   delegates to Congress and empowered them to join in a declaration of
   independence.^[57]

   Only Maryland and New York had yet to authorize independence. When the
   Continental Congress had adopted Adams's radical May 15 preamble,
   Maryland's delegates walked out and sent to the Maryland Convention for
   instructions.^[58] On May 20, the Maryland Convention rejected Adams's
   preamble, instructing its delegates to remain against independence, but
   Samuel Chase went to Maryland and, thanks to local resolutions in favor
   of independence, was able to get the Maryland Convention to change its
   mind on June 28.^[59] Only the New York delegates were unable to get
   revised instructions. When Congress had been considering the resolution
   of independence on June 8, the New York Provincial Congress told the
   delegates to wait.^[60] But on June 30, the Provincial Congress
   evacuated New York as British forces approached, and would not convene
   again until July 10. This meant that New York's delegates would not be
   authorized to declare independence until after Congress had made its
   decision.^[61]
   This idealized depiction of (left to right) Franklin, Adams, and
   Jefferson working on the Declaration (Jean Leon Gerome Ferris, 1900)
   was widely reprinted.^[62]

Draft and adoption

   While political maneuvering was setting the stage for an official
   declaration of independence, a document explaining the decision was
   being written. On June 11, 1776, Congress appointed a "Committee of
   Five", consisting of John Adams of Massachusetts, Benjamin Franklin of
   Pennsylvania, Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, Robert R. Livingston of New
   York, and Roger Sherman of Connecticut, to draft a declaration. Because
   the committee left no minutes, there is some uncertainty about how the
   drafting process proceeded—accounts written many years later by
   Jefferson and Adams, although frequently cited, are contradictory and
   not entirely reliable.^[63] What is certain is that the committee,
   after discussing the general outline that the document should follow,
   decided that Jefferson would write the first draft.^[64] The committee
   in general, and Jefferson in particular, thought Adams should write the
   document, but Adams persuaded the committee to choose Jefferson and
   promised to consult with Jefferson personally.^[2] Considering
   Congress's busy schedule, Jefferson probably had limited time for
   writing over the next seventeen days, and likely wrote the draft
   quickly.^[65] He then consulted the others, made some changes, and then
   produced another copy incorporating these alterations. The committee
   presented this copy to the Congress on June 28, 1776. The title of the
   document was "A Declaration by the Representatives of the United States
   of America, in General Congress assembled."^[66]
   "Declaration House", the boarding house at Market and S. 7th Street
   where Jefferson wrote the Declaration
   Jefferson drafted the Declaration on this portable lap desk of his own
   design.

   Congress ordered that the draft "lie on the table".^[67] For two days
   Congress methodically edited Jefferson's primary document, shortening
   it by a fourth, removing unnecessary wording, and improving sentence
   structure.^[68] Congress removed Jefferson's assertion that Britain had
   forced slavery on the colonies, in order to moderate the document and
   appease persons in Britain who supported the Revolution. Although
   Jefferson wrote that Congress had "mangled" his draft version, the
   Declaration that was finally produced, according to his biographer John
   Ferling, was "the majestic document that inspired both contemporaries
   and posterity."^[68]

   On Monday, July 1, having tabled the draft of the declaration, Congress
   resolved itself into a committee of the whole, with Benjamin Harrison
   of Virginia presiding, and resumed debate on Lee's resolution of
   independence.^[69] John Dickinson made one last effort to delay the
   decision, arguing that Congress should not declare independence without
   first securing a foreign alliance and finalizing the Articles of
   Confederation.^[70] John Adams gave a speech in reply to Dickinson,
   restating the case for an immediate declaration.

   After a long day of speeches, a vote was taken. As always, each colony
   cast a single vote; the delegation for each colony—numbering two to
   seven members—voted amongst themselves to determine the colony's vote.
   Pennsylvania and South Carolina voted against declaring independence.
   The New York delegation, lacking permission to vote for independence,
   abstained. Delaware cast no vote because the delegation was split
   between Thomas McKean (who voted yes) and George Read (who voted no).
   The remaining nine delegations voted in favor of independence, which
   meant that the resolution had been approved by the committee of the
   whole. The next step was for the resolution to be voted upon by the
   Congress itself. Edward Rutledge of South Carolina, who was opposed to
   Lee's resolution but desirous of unanimity, moved that the vote be
   postponed until the following day.^[71]

   On July 2, South Carolina reversed its position and voted for
   independence. In the Pennsylvania delegation, Dickinson and Robert
   Morris abstained, allowing the delegation to vote three-to-two in favor
   of independence. The tie in the Delaware delegation was broken by the
   timely arrival of Caesar Rodney, who voted for independence. The New
   York delegation abstained once again, since they were still not
   authorized to vote for independence, although they would be allowed to
   do so by the New York Provincial Congress a week later.^[72] The
   resolution of independence had been adopted with twelve affirmative
   votes and one abstention. With this, the colonies had officially
   severed political ties with Great Britain.^[73] In a now-famous letter
   written to his wife on the following day, John Adams predicted that
   July 2 would become a great American holiday.^[74] Adams thought that
   the vote for independence would be commemorated; he did not foresee
   that Americans—including himself—would instead celebrate Independence
   Day on the date that the announcement of that act was finalized.^[75]

   After voting in favor of the resolution of independence, Congress
   turned its attention to the committee's draft of the declaration. Over
   several days of debate, Congress made a few changes in wording and
   deleted nearly a fourth of the text, most notably a passage critical of
   the slave trade, changes that Jefferson resented.^[76] On July 4, 1776,
   the wording of the Declaration of Independence was approved and sent to
   the printer for publication.
   The opening of the original printing of the Declaration, printed on
   July 4, 1776 under Jefferson's supervision. The engrossed copy (shown
   at the top of this article) was made later. Note the opening lines of
   the two versions differ.^[77]

Annotated text of the engrossed Declaration

   The Declaration is not divided into formal sections; but it is often
   discussed as consisting of five parts: Introduction, the Preamble, the
   Indictment of George III, the Denunciation of the British people, and
   the Conclusion.^[78]
   Introduction

   Asserts as a matter of Natural Law the ability of a people to assume
   political independence; acknowledges that the grounds for such
   independence must be reasonable, and therefore explicable, and ought to
   be explained.
   In CONGRESS, July 4, 1776.
   The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen United States of America,

   When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people
   to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another,
   and to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal
   station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a
   decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should
   declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
   Preamble

   Outlines a general philosophy of government that justifies revolution
   when government harms natural rights.^[78]

   We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
   equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
   Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness
   - That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men,
   deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed, That
   whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it
   is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute
   new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing
   its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect
   their Safety and Happiness.^[79]
   Indictment

   A bill of particulars documenting the king's "repeated injuries and
   usurpations" of the Americans' rights and liberties.^[78]
   Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should
   not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all
   experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while
   evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms
   to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and
   usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to
   reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their
   duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their
   future security.^[80] Such has been the patient sufferance of these
   Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter
   their former Systems of Government. The history of the present King of
   Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all
   having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over
   these States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.

   He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for
   the public good.

   He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing
   importance, unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should
   be obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend
   to them.

   He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large
   districts of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of
   Representation in the Legislature, a right inestimable to them and
   formidable to tyrants only.

   He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual,
   uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their Public Records,
   for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his
   measures.

   He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with
   manly firmness of his invasions on the rights of the people.

   He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause
   others to be elected, whereby the Legislative Powers, incapable of
   Annihilation, have returned to the People at large for their exercise;
   the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of
   invasion from without, and convulsions within.

   He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that
   purpose obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing
   to pass others to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the
   conditions of new Appropriations of Lands.

   He has obstructed the Administration of Justice by refusing his Assent
   to Laws for establishing Judiciary Powers.

   He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone for the tenure of their
   offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

   He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of
   Officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.

   He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies without the
   Consent of our legislatures.

   He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to
   the Civil Power.

   He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to
   our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to
   their Acts of pretended Legislation:

   For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

   For protecting them, by a mock Trial from punishment for any Murders
   which they should commit on the Inhabitants of these States:

   For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:

   For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent:

   For depriving us in many cases, of the benefit of Trial by Jury:

   For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offences:

   For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighbouring
   Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging
   its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument
   for introducing the same absolute rule into these states

   For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable Laws and
   altering fundamentally the Forms of our Governments:

   For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring themselves invested
   with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

   He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection
   and waging War against us.

   He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and
   destroyed the lives of our people.

   He is at this time transporting large Armies of foreign Mercenaries to
   compleat the works of death, desolation, and tyranny, already begun
   with circumstances of Cruelty & Perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most
   barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.

   He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high Seas
   to bear Arms against their Country, to become the executioners of their
   friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by their Hands.

   He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured
   to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian
   Savages whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction
   of all ages, sexes and conditions.

   In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in
   the most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only
   by repeated injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every
   act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free
   people.
   Denunciation

   This section essentially finished the case for independence. The
   conditions that justified revolution have been shown.^[78]
   Nor have We been wanting in attentions to our British brethren. We have
   warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to
   extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of
   the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have
   appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured
   them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations,
   which, would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence.
   They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
   We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our
   Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in
   War, in Peace Friends.
   Conclusion

   The signers assert that there exist conditions under which people must
   change their government, that the British have produced such
   conditions, and by necessity the colonies must throw off political ties
   with the British Crown and become independent states. The conclusion
   contains, at its core, the Lee Resolution that had been passed on July
   2.
   We, therefore, the Representatives of the united States of America, in
   General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the
   world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name, and by
   Authority of the good People of these Colonies, solemnly publish and
   declare, That these united Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free
   and Independent States; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to
   the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and
   the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and
   that as Free and Independent States, they have full Power to levy War,
   conclude Peace, contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all
   other Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do. And for
   the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection
   of divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our
   Fortunes and our sacred Honor.
   Signatures

   The first and most famous signature on the engrossed copy was that of
   John Hancock, President of the Continental Congress. Two future
   presidents, Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, and a father and
   great-grandfather of two other presidents, Benjamin Harrison, were
   among the signatories. Edward Rutledge (age 26), was the youngest
   signer, and Benjamin Franklin (age 70) was the oldest signer. The
   fifty-six signers of the Declaration represented the new states as
   follows (from north to south):^[81]
     * New Hampshire: Josiah Bartlett, William Whipple, Matthew Thornton
     * Massachusetts: Samuel Adams, John Adams, John Hancock, Robert Treat
       Paine, Elbridge Gerry
     * Rhode Island: Stephen Hopkins, William Ellery
     * Connecticut: Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, William Williams,
       Oliver Wolcott
     * New York: William Floyd, Philip Livingston, Francis Lewis, Lewis
       Morris
     * New Jersey: Richard Stockton, John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson,
       John Hart, Abraham Clark
     * Pennsylvania: Robert Morris, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, John
       Morton, George Clymer, James Smith, George Taylor, James Wilson,
       George Ross
     * Delaware: George Read, Caesar Rodney, Thomas McKean
     * Maryland: Samuel Chase, William Paca, Thomas Stone, Charles Carroll
       of Carrollton
     * Virginia: George Wythe, Richard Henry Lee, Thomas Jefferson,
       Benjamin Harrison, Thomas Nelson, Jr., Francis Lightfoot Lee,
       Carter Braxton
     * North Carolina: William Hooper, Joseph Hewes, John Penn
     * South Carolina: Edward Rutledge, Thomas Heyward, Jr., Thomas Lynch,
       Jr., Arthur Middleton
     * Georgia: Button Gwinnett, Lyman Hall, George Walton

Influences

   English political philosopher John Locke (1632–1704)

   Historians have often sought to identify the sources that most
   influenced the words and political philosophy of the Declaration of
   Independence. By Jefferson's own admission, the Declaration contained
   no original ideas, but was instead a statement of sentiments widely
   shared by supporters of the American Revolution. As he explained in
   1825:

     Neither aiming at originality of principle or sentiment, nor yet
     copied from any particular and previous writing, it was intended to
     be an expression of the American mind, and to give to that
     expression the proper tone and spirit called for by the
     occasion.^[82]

   Jefferson's most immediate sources were two documents written in June
   1776: his own draft of the preamble of the Constitution of Virginia,
   and George Mason's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights. Ideas
   and phrases from both of these documents appear in the Declaration of
   Independence.^[83] They were, in turn, directly influenced by the 1689
   English Declaration of Rights, which formally ended the reign of King
   James II.^[84] During the American Revolution, Jefferson and other
   Americans looked to the English Declaration of Rights as a model of how
   to end the reign of an unjust king.^[85] The Scottish Declaration of
   Arbroath (1320) and the Dutch Act of Abjuration (1581) have also been
   offered as models for Jefferson's Declaration, but these models are now
   accepted by few scholars.^[86]

   Jefferson wrote that a number of authors exerted a general influence on
   the words of the Declaration.^[87] The English political theorist John
   Locke, whom Jefferson called one of "the three greatest men that have
   ever lived",^[88] is usually cited as one of the primary influences. In
   1922, historian Carl L. Becker wrote that "Most Americans had absorbed
   Locke's works as a kind of political gospel; and the Declaration, in
   its form, in its phraseology, follows closely certain sentences in
   Locke's second treatise on government."^[89] The extent of Locke's
   influence on the American Revolution has been questioned by some
   subsequent scholars, however. Historian Ray Forrest Harvey declared in
   1937, as he argued for the dominant influence of the Swiss jurist Jean
   Jacques Burlamaqui, that Jefferson and Locke were at "two opposite
   poles" in their political philosophy, as evidenced by Jefferson's use
   in the Declaration of Independence of the phrase "pursuit of happiness"
   instead of "property".^[90] Other scholars emphasized the influence of
   republicanism rather than Locke's classical liberalism.^[91] Historian
   Garry Wills argued that Jefferson was influenced by the Scottish
   Enlightenment, particularly Francis Hutcheson, rather than Locke,^[92]
   an interpretation that has been strongly criticized.^[93]

   Legal historian John Phillip Reid has written that the emphasis on the
   political philosophy of the Declaration has been misplaced. The
   Declaration is not a philosophical tract about natural rights, argues
   Reid, but is instead a legal document—an indictment against King George
   for violating the constitutional rights of the colonists.^[94] In
   contrast, historian Dennis J. Mahoney argues that the Declaration is
   not a legal document at all, but a philosophical document influenced by
   Emerich de Vattel, Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui, and Samuel Pufendorf.^[95]
   Historian David Armitage has argued that the Declaration is a document
   of international law. According to Armitage, the Declaration was
   strongly influenced by de Vattel's The Law of Nations, a book that
   Benjamin Franklin said was "continually in the hands of the members of
   our Congress".^[96] Armitage writes that because "Vattel made
   independence fundamental to his definition of statehood", the primary
   purpose of the Declaration was "to express the international legal
   sovereignty of the United States". If the United States were to have
   any hope of being recognized by the European powers, the American
   revolutionaries had first to make it clear that they were no longer
   dependent on Great Britain.^[97]

Signing

   The signed copy of the Declaration. Now badly faded, because of poor
   preserving practices in the 19th century, is on display at the National
   Archives in Washington, D.C.
   Main article: Signing of the United States Declaration of Independence

   The Declaration became official when Congress voted for it on July 4;
   signatures of the delegates were not needed to make it official. The
   handwritten copy of the Declaration of Independence that was signed by
   Congress is dated July 4, 1776. The signatures of fifty-six delegates
   are affixed; however, the exact date each person signed it has long
   been the subject of debate. Jefferson, Franklin, and Adams all wrote
   that the Declaration had been signed by Congress on July 4.^[98] But in
   1796, signer Thomas McKean disputed that the Declaration had been
   signed on July 4, pointing out that some signers were not then present,
   including several who were not even elected to Congress until after
   that date.^[99]

   According to the 1911 record of events by the U.S. State Department,
   under Secretary Philander C. Knox, the Declaration was transposed on
   paper, adopted by the Continental Congress, and signed by John Hancock,
   President of the Congress, on July 4, 1776.^[100] On August 2, 1776, a
   parchment paper copy of the Declaration was signed by 56 persons.^[100]
   Many of these signers were not present when the original Declaration
   was adopted on July 4.^[100] One signer, Matthew Thornton from New
   Hampshire, who was seated in the Continental Congress in November,
   asked for and received the privilege of adding his signature at that
   time, and signed on November 4, 1776.^[100]
   On July 4, 1776, Continental Congress President John Hancock's
   signature authenticated the United States Declaration of Independence.

   Historians have generally accepted McKean's version of events, arguing
   that the famous signed version of the Declaration was created after
   July 19, and was not signed by Congress until August 2, 1776.^[101] In
   1986, legal historian Wilfred Ritz argued that historians had
   misunderstood the primary documents and given too much credence to
   McKean, who had not been present in Congress on July 4.^[102] According
   to Ritz, about thirty-four delegates signed the Declaration on July 4,
   and the others signed on or after August 2.^[103] Historians who reject
   a July 4 signing maintain that most delegates signed on August 2, and
   that those eventual signers who were not present added their names
   later.^[104] Two future U.S. presidents, Thomas Jefferson and John
   Adams, were among the signatories.

   The most famous signature on the engrossed copy is that of John
   Hancock, who, as President of Congress, presumably signed first.^[105]
   Hancock's large, flamboyant signature became iconic, and John Hancock
   emerged in the United States as an informal synonym for
   "signature".^[106] A commonly circulated but apocryphal account claims
   that after Hancock signed, the delegate from Massachusetts commented,
   "The British ministry can read that name without spectacles." Another
   apocryphal report indicates that Hancock proudly declared, "There! I
   guess King George will be able to read that!" ^[107]

   Various legends about the signing of the Declaration emerged years
   later, when the document had become an important national symbol. In
   one famous story, John Hancock supposedly said that Congress, having
   signed the Declaration, must now "all hang together", and Benjamin
   Franklin replied: "Yes, we must indeed all hang together, or most
   assuredly we shall all hang separately." The quotation did not appear
   in print until more than fifty years after Franklin's death.^[108]

   The Syng inkstand, used at the signing, was also used at the signing of
   the United States Constitution in 1787.

Publication and reaction

   Johannes Adam Simon Oertel's painting Pulling Down the Statue of King
   George III, N.Y.C., ca. 1859, depicts citizens destroying a statue of
   King George after the Declaration was read in New York City on July 9,
   1776.

   After Congress approved the final wording of the Declaration on July 4,
   a handwritten copy was sent a few blocks away to the printing shop of
   John Dunlap. Through the night Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides for
   distribution. Before long, the Declaration was read to audiences and
   reprinted in newspapers across the thirteen states. The first official
   public reading of the document was by John Nixon in the yard of
   Independence Hall on July 8; public readings also took place on that
   day in Trenton, New Jersey, and Easton, Pennsylvania.^[109] A German
   translation of the Declaration was published in Philadelphia by July
   9.^[110]

   President of Congress John Hancock sent a broadside to General George
   Washington, instructing him to have it proclaimed "at the Head of the
   Army in the way you shall think it most proper".^[111] Washington had
   the Declaration read to his troops in New York City on July 9, with
   thousands of British troops on ships in the harbor. Washington and
   Congress hoped the Declaration would inspire the soldiers, and
   encourage others to join the army.^[109] After hearing the Declaration,
   crowds in many cities tore down and destroyed signs or statues
   representing royal authority. An equestrian statue of King George in
   New York City was pulled down and the lead used to make musket
   balls.^[112]
   William Whipple, signer of the Declaration of Independence, freed his
   slave believing he could not fight for liberty and own a slave.

   British officials in North America sent copies of the Declaration to
   Great Britain.^[113] It was published in British newspapers beginning
   in mid-August, it had reached Florence and Warsaw by mid-September, and
   a German translation appeared in Switzerland by October. The first copy
   of the Declaration sent to France got lost, and the second copy arrived
   only in November 1776.^[114] It reached Portuguese America by Brazilian
   medical student ‘Vendek’ José Joaquim Maia e Barbalho, who had met with
   Thomas Jefferson in Nîmes in 1786.^[contradiction] Though the
   Spanish-American authorities banned the circulation of the Declaration,
   it was widely transmitted and translated, by the Venezuelan Manuel
   García de Sena, by the Colombian Miguel de Pombo, by the Ecuadorian
   Vicente Rocafuerte and by the New Englanders Richard Cleveland and
   William Shaler, who distributed the Declaration and the United States
   Constitution among creoles in Chile and Indians in Mexico in
   1821.^[115] The North Ministry did not give an official answer to the
   Declaration, but instead secretly commissioned pamphleteer John Lind to
   publish a response, which was entitled Answer to the Declaration of the
   American Congress.^[116] British Tories denounced the signers of the
   Declaration for not applying the same principles of "life, liberty, and
   the pursuit of happiness" to African Americans.^[117] Thomas
   Hutchinson, the former royal governor of Massachusetts, also published
   a rebuttal.^[118]^[119] These pamphlets challenged various aspects of
   the Declaration. Hutchinson argued that the American Revolution was the
   work of a few conspirators who wanted independence from the outset, and
   who had finally achieved it by inducing otherwise loyal colonists to
   rebel.^[120] Lind's pamphlet had an anonymous attack on the concept of
   natural rights, written by Jeremy Bentham, an argument which he would
   repeat during the French Revolution.^[121] Both pamphlets asked how the
   American slaveholders in Congress could proclaim that "all men are
   created equal" without freeing their own slaves.^[122]

   Enslaved African Americans also heard the call to liberty and freedom.
   Tens of thousands of slaves left plantations in the South and farms in
   the North to join the British lines, or to escape during the disruption
   of war. The British kept their promise and evacuated thousands of Black
   Loyalists with their troops in the closing days of the war, for
   resettlement as freedmen in Nova Scotia, Jamaica or England. Four to
   five thousand African Americans served in the Continental Army fighting
   for American Independence. The revolutionary government freed slaves
   who enlisted with the Continentals; 5% of George Washington's forces
   consisted of African-American troops.

   William Whipple, a signer of the Declaration of Independence who had
   fought in the war, freed his slave, Prince Whipple, because of
   revolutionary ideals. In the postwar decades, so many other
   slaveholders also freed their slaves that from 1790 to 1810, the
   percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased to 8.3 percent
   from less than one percent of the black population.^[123] Most Northern
   states abolished slavery; although with gradual emancipation, slaves
   were still listed in some mid-Atlantic state censuses in 1840.

   Having fought for independence, after the war freedmen faced housing
   and job discrimination, were denied voting rights in several states,
   and needed passes to travel between the states.^[124]

History of the documents

   Main article: Physical history of the United States Declaration of
   Independence

   The official copy was the one printed on July 4, 1776 under Jefferson's
   supervision. It was sent to the states and the Army, and was widely
   reprinted in newspapers. The slightly different "engrossed copy" (shown
   at the top of this article) was made later for members to sign. The
   engrossed version is the one widely distributed in the 21st century.
   Note the opening lines of the two version differ.^[77]

   The copy of the Declaration that was signed by Congress is known as the
   engrossed or parchment copy. It was probably engrossed (that is,
   carefully handwritten) by clerk Timothy Matlack.^[125] Because of poor
   conservation of the engrossed copy through the 19th century, a
   facsimile made in 1823, rather than the original, has become the basis
   of most modern reproductions.^[125] In 1921, custody of the engrossed
   copy of the Declaration, along with the United States Constitution, was
   transferred from the State Department to the Library of Congress. After
   the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, the documents were moved
   for safekeeping to the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox in
   Kentucky, where they were kept until 1944.^[126] In 1952, the engrossed
   Declaration was transferred to the National Archives, and is now on
   permanent display at the National Archives in the "Rotunda for the
   Charters of Freedom".^[127]
   The Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom in the National Archives
   building

   Although the document signed by Congress and enshrined in the National
   Archives is usually regarded as the Declaration of Independence,
   historian Julian P. Boyd argued that the Declaration, like Magna Carta,
   is not a single document. Boyd considered the printed broadsides
   ordered by Congress to be official texts as well. The Declaration was
   first published as a broadside that was printed the night of July 4 by
   John Dunlap of Philadelphia. Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides, of
   which 26 are known to survive. The 26th copy was discovered in The
   National Archives in England in 2009.^[128] In 1777, Congress
   commissioned Mary Katherine Goddard to print a new broadside that,
   unlike the Dunlap broadside, listed the signers of the
   Declaration.^[125]^[129] Nine copies of the Goddard broadside are known
   to still exist.^[129] A variety of broadsides printed by the states are
   also extant.^[129]

   Several early handwritten copies and drafts of the Declaration have
   also been preserved. Jefferson kept a four-page draft that late in life
   he called the "original Rough draught".^[130] How many drafts Jefferson
   wrote prior to this one, and how much of the text was contributed by
   other committee members, is unknown. In 1947, Boyd discovered a
   fragment of an earlier draft in Jefferson's handwriting.^[131]
   Jefferson and Adams sent copies of the rough draft, with slight
   variations, to friends.

   During the writing process, Jefferson showed the rough draft to Adams
   and Franklin, and perhaps other members of the drafting
   committee,^[130] who made a few more changes. Franklin, for example,
   may have been responsible for changing Jefferson's original phrase "We
   hold these truths to be sacred and undeniable" to "We hold these truths
   to be self-evident".^[132] Jefferson incorporated these changes into a
   copy that was submitted to Congress in the name of the committee.^[130]
   The copy that was submitted to Congress on June 28 has been lost, and
   was perhaps destroyed in the printing process,^[133] or destroyed
   during the debates in accordance with Congress's secrecy rule.^[134]

Legacy

   Having served its original purpose in announcing the independence of
   the United States, the Declaration was initially neglected in the years
   immediately following the American Revolution.^[135] Early celebrations
   of Independence Day, like early histories of the Revolution, largely
   ignored the Declaration. Although the act of declaring independence was
   considered important, the text announcing that act attracted little
   attention.^[136] The Declaration was rarely mentioned during the
   debates about the United States Constitution, and its language was not
   incorporated into that document.^[137] George Mason's draft of the
   Virginia Declaration of Rights was more influential, and its language
   was echoed in state constitutions and state bills of rights more often
   than Jefferson's words.^[138] "In none of these documents", wrote
   Pauline Maier, "is there any evidence whatsoever that the Declaration
   of Independence lived in men's minds as a classic statement of American
   political principles."^[139]

Influence in other countries

   Many leaders of the French Revolution admired the Declaration of
   Independence^[139] but were also interested in the new American state
   constitutions.^[140] The inspiration and content of the French
   Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen (1789) emerged largely
   from the ideals of the American Revolution.^[141] Its key drafts were
   prepared by Lafayette, working closely in Paris with his friend
   Jefferson. It also borrowed language from George Mason's Virginia
   Declaration of Rights.^[142]^[143]

   According to historian David Armitage, the Declaration of Independence
   did prove to be internationally influential, but not as a statement of
   human rights. Armitage argued that the Declaration was the first in a
   new genre of declarations of independence that announced the creation
   of new states.

   Other French leaders were directly influenced by the text of the
   Declaration of Independence itself. The Manifesto of the Province of
   Flanders (1790) was the first foreign derivation of the
   Declaration;^[144] others include the Venezuelan Declaration of
   Independence (1811), the Liberian Declaration of Independence (1847),
   the declarations of secession by the Confederate States of America
   (1860–61), and the Vietnamese Proclamation of Independence
   (1945).^[145] These declarations echoed the United States Declaration
   of Independence in announcing the independence of a new state, without
   necessarily endorsing the political philosophy of the original.^[146]

   Some other countries that used the Declaration as inspiration or
   directly copied sections from it is the Haitian declaration of 1
   January 1804 from the Haitian Revolution, the United Provinces of New
   Granada in 1811, the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816, the
   Chilean Declaration of Independence in 1818, Costa Rica in 1821, El
   Salvador in 1821, Guatemala in 1821, Honduras in (1821), Mexico in
   1821, Nicaragua in 1821, Peru in 1821, Bolivian War of Independence in
   1825, Uruguay in 1825, Ecuador in 1830, Colombia in 1831, Paraguay in
   1842, Dominican Republic in 1844, Texas Declaration of Independence in
   March 1836, California Republic in November 1836, Hungarian Declaration
   of Independence in 1849, Declaration of the Independence of New Zealand
   in 1835, and the Czechoslovak declaration of independence from 1918
   drafted in Washington D.C. with Gutzon Borglum among the drafters. The
   Rhodesian declaration of independence, ratified in November 1965, is
   based on the American one as well, however, it omits the phrase "all
   men are created equal", along with "the consent of the
   governed".^[115]^[147]^[148]^[149]

Revival of interest

   In the United States, interest in the Declaration was revived in the
   1790s with the emergence of America's first political parties.^[150]
   Throughout the 1780s, few Americans knew, or cared, who wrote the
   Declaration.^[151] But in the next decade, Jeffersonian Republicans
   sought political advantage over their rival Federalists by promoting
   both the importance of the Declaration and Jefferson as its
   author.^[152] Federalists responded by casting doubt on Jefferson's
   authorship or originality, and by emphasizing that independence was
   declared by the whole Congress, with Jefferson as just one member of
   the drafting committee. Federalists insisted that Congress's act of
   declaring independence, in which Federalist John Adams had played a
   major role, was more important than the document announcing that
   act.^[153] But this view, like the Federalist Party, would fade away,
   and before long the act of declaring independence would become
   synonymous with the document.
   About 50 men, most of them seated, are in a large meeting room. Most
   are focused on the five men standing in the center of the room. The
   tallest of the five is laying a document on a table.
   John Trumbull's famous painting is often identified as a depiction of
   the signing of the Declaration, but it actually shows the drafting
   committee presenting its work to the Congress.^[154]

   A less partisan appreciation for the Declaration emerged in the years
   following the War of 1812, thanks to a growing American nationalism and
   a renewed interest in the history of the Revolution.^[155] In 1817,
   Congress commissioned John Trumbull's famous painting of the signers,
   which was exhibited to large crowds before being installed in the
   Capitol.^[156] The earliest commemorative printings of the Declaration
   also appeared at this time, offering many Americans their first view of
   the signed document.^[157] Collective biographies of the signers were
   first published in the 1820s,^[158] giving birth to what Garry Wills
   called the "cult of the signers".^[159] In the years that followed,
   many stories about the writing and signing of the document would be
   published for the first time.

   When interest in the Declaration was revived, the sections that were
   most important in 1776—the announcement of the independence of the
   United States and the grievances against King George—were no longer
   relevant. But the second paragraph, with its talk of self-evident
   truths and unalienable rights, were applicable long after the war had
   ended.^[160] Because the Constitution and the Bill of Rights lacked
   sweeping statements about rights and equality, advocates of
   marginalized groups turned to the Declaration for support.^[161]
   Starting in the 1820s, variations of the Declaration were issued to
   proclaim the rights of workers, farmers, women, and others.^[162] In
   1848, for example, the Seneca Falls Convention, a meeting of women's
   rights advocates, declared that "all men and women are created
   equal".^[163]

Slavery and the Declaration

   Further information: Slavery in the colonial United States

   The contradiction between the claim that "all men are created equal"
   and the existence of American slavery attracted comment when the
   Declaration was first published. As mentioned above, although Jefferson
   had included a paragraph in his initial draft that strongly indicted
   Britain's role in the slave trade, this was deleted from the final
   version.^[76] Jefferson himself was a prominent Virginia slave holder
   having owned hundreds of slaves.^[164] Referring to this seeming
   contradiction, English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter,
   "If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an American
   patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and
   with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves."^[165] In
   the 19th century, the Declaration took on a special significance for
   the abolitionist movement. Historian Bertram Wyatt-Brown wrote that
   "abolitionists tended to interpret the Declaration of Independence as a
   theological as well as a political document".^[166] Abolitionist
   leaders Benjamin Lundy and William Lloyd Garrison adopted the "twin
   rocks" of "the Bible and the Declaration of Independence" as the basis
   for their philosophies. "As long as there remains a single copy of the
   Declaration of Independence, or of the Bible, in our land," wrote
   Garrison, "we will not despair."^[167] For radical abolitionists like
   Garrison, the most important part of the Declaration was its assertion
   of the right of revolution: Garrison called for the destruction of the
   government under the Constitution, and the creation of a new state
   dedicated to the principles of the Declaration.^[168]

   The controversial question of whether to add additional slave states to
   the United States coincided with the growing stature of the
   Declaration. The first major public debate about slavery and the
   Declaration took place during the Missouri controversy of 1819 to
   1821.^[169] Antislavery Congressmen argued that the language of the
   Declaration indicated that the Founding Fathers of the United States
   had been opposed to slavery in principle, and so new slave states
   should not be added to the country.^[170] Proslavery Congressmen, led
   by Senator Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina, argued that since the
   Declaration was not a part of the Constitution, it had no relevance to
   the question.^[171]

   With the antislavery movement gaining momentum, defenders of slavery
   such as John Randolph and John C. Calhoun found it necessary to argue
   that the Declaration's assertion that "all men are created equal" was
   false, or at least that it did not apply to black people.^[172] During
   the debate over the Kansas–Nebraska Act in 1853, for example, Senator
   John Pettit of Indiana argued that "all men are created equal", rather
   than a "self-evident truth", was a "self-evident lie".^[173] Opponents
   of the Kansas–Nebraska Act, including Salmon P. Chase and Benjamin
   Wade, defended the Declaration and what they saw as its antislavery
   principles.^[174]

Lincoln and the Declaration

   Congressman Abraham Lincoln
   Shepherd, 1845–1846

   The Declaration's relationship to slavery was taken up in 1854 by
   Abraham Lincoln, a little-known former Congressman who idolized the
   Founding Fathers.^[175] Lincoln thought that the Declaration of
   Independence expressed the highest principles of the American
   Revolution, and that the Founding Fathers had tolerated slavery with
   the expectation that it would ultimately wither away.^[8] For the
   United States to legitimize the expansion of slavery in the
   Kansas-Nebraska Act, thought Lincoln, was to repudiate the principles
   of the Revolution. In his October 1854 Peoria speech, Lincoln said:

     Nearly eighty years ago we began by declaring that all men are
     created equal; but now from that beginning we have run down to the
     other declaration, that for some men to enslave others is a "sacred
     right of self-government. ... Our republican robe is soiled and
     trailed in the dust. Let us repurify it. ... Let us re-adopt the
     Declaration of Independence, and with it, the practices, and policy,
     which harmonize with it. ... If we do this, we shall not only have
     saved the Union: but we shall have saved it, as to make, and keep
     it, forever worthy of the saving.^[176]

   The meaning of the Declaration was a recurring topic in the famed
   debates between Lincoln and Stephen Douglas in 1858. Douglas argued
   that "all men are created equal" in the Declaration referred to white
   men only. The purpose of the Declaration, he said, had simply been to
   justify the independence of the United States, and not to proclaim the
   equality of any "inferior or degraded race".^[177] Lincoln, however,
   thought that the language of the Declaration was deliberately
   universal, setting a high moral standard for which the American
   republic should aspire. "I had thought the Declaration contemplated the
   progressive improvement in the condition of all men everywhere", he
   said.^[178] During the seventh and last joint debate with Steven
   Douglas at Alton, Illinois on 15 October 1858 Lincoln said about the
   declaration:

     I think the authors of that notable instrument intended to include
     all men, but they did not mean to declare all men equal in all
     respects. They did not mean to say all men were equal in color,
     size, intellect, moral development, or social capacity. They defined
     with tolerable distinctness in what they did consider all men
     created equal — equal in "certain inalienable rights, among which
     are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." This they said,
     and this they meant. They did not mean to assert the obvious untruth
     that all were then actually enjoying that equality, or yet that they
     were about to confer it immediately upon them. In fact, they had no
     power to confer such a boon. They meant simply to declare the right,
     so that the enforcement of it might follow as fast as circumstances
     should permit. They meant to set up a standard maxim for free
     society which should be familiar to all, constantly looked to,
     constantly labored for, and even, though never perfectly attained,
     constantly approximated, and thereby constantly spreading and
     deepening its influence, and augmenting the happiness and value of
     life to all people, of all colors, everywhere.^[179]

   According to Pauline Maier, Douglas's interpretation was more
   historically accurate, but Lincoln's view ultimately prevailed. "In
   Lincoln's hands", wrote Maier, "the Declaration of Independence became
   first and foremost a living document" with "a set of goals to be
   realized over time".^[180]

   [T]here is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all
   the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the
   right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I hold that he is
   as much entitled to these as the white man.
   Abraham Lincoln, 1858^[181]

   Like Daniel Webster, James Wilson, and Joseph Story before him, Lincoln
   argued that the Declaration of Independence was a founding document of
   the United States, and that this had important implications for
   interpreting the Constitution, which had been ratified more than a
   decade after the Declaration.^[182] Although the Constitution did not
   use the word "equality", Lincoln believed that "all men are created
   equal" remained a part of the nation's founding principles.^[183] He
   famously expressed this belief in the opening sentence of his 1863
   Gettysburg Address: "Four score and seven years ago [i.e. in 1776] our
   fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in
   Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created
   equal."

   Lincoln's view of the Declaration as a moral guide to interpreting the
   Constitution became influential. "For most people now," wrote Garry
   Wills in 1992, "the Declaration means what Lincoln told us it means, as
   a way of correcting the Constitution itself without overthrowing
   it."^[184] Admirers of Lincoln, such as Harry V. Jaffa, praised this
   development. Critics of Lincoln, notably Willmoore Kendall and Mel
   Bradford, argued that Lincoln dangerously expanded the scope of the
   national government, and violated states' rights, by reading the
   Declaration into the Constitution.^[185]
   Elizabeth Cady Stanton and her two sons. 1848.

Women's suffrage and the Declaration

   In July 1848, the first Woman's Rights Convention was held in Seneca
   Falls, New York. The convention was organized by Elizabeth Cady
   Stanton, Lucretia Mott, Mary Ann McClintock, Martha White, and Jane
   Hunt. In their "Declaration of Sentiments", patterned on the
   Declaration of Independence, the convention members demanded social and
   political equality for women. Their motto was that "All men and women
   are created equal" and the convention demanded suffrage for women. The
   suffrage movement was supported by William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick
   Douglass.^[186]^[187]

Legacy

   Presentation of the Declaration depicted on a United States postal
   issue of 1869

   The adoption of the Declaration of Independence was dramatized in the
   1969 Tony Award-winning musical play 1776, and the 1972 movie of the
   same name, as well as in the 2008 television miniseries John Adams.

   The engrossed copy of the Declaration is central to the 2004 Hollywood
   film National Treasure, in which the main character steals the document
   because he believes it has secret clues to a treasure hidden by some of
   the Founding Fathers.

   The Declaration is featured in The Probability Broach (1980), an
   alternative history novel, when one word is added to the document, to
   read that governments "derive their just power from the unanimous
   consent of the governed".

   In 1984 the Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of
   Independence was dedicated in Constitution Gardens on the National Mall
   in Washington, D.C., where the signatures of all the original signers
   are carved in stone with their names, places of residences and
   occupations.

   The Declaration document is at risk in Honour Among Thieves (1993), a
   novel by Jeffrey Archer in which Saddam Hussein tries to steal the
   Declaration to burn it publicly on July 4.

References

    1. ^ Becker, Declaration of Independence, 5.
    2. ^ ^a ^b "Declaring Independence", Revolutionary War, Digital
       History, University of Houston. From Adams' notes: "Why will you
       not? You ought to do it." "I will not." "Why?" "Reasons enough."
       "What can be your reasons?" "Reason first, you are a Virginian, and
       a Virginian ought to appear at the head of this business. Reason
       second, I am obnoxious, suspected, and unpopular. You are very much
       otherwise. Reason third, you can write ten times better than I
       can." "Well," said Jefferson, "if you are decided, I will do as
       well as I can." "Very well. When you have drawn it up, we will have
       a meeting."
    3. ^ Boyd (1976), The Declaration of Independence: The Mystery of the
       Lost Original, pg. 438
    4. ^ "Did You Know...Independence Day Should Actually Be July 2?"
       (Press release). National Archives and Records Administration. 1
       June 2005. Retrieved 2012-07-04.
    5. ^ The Declaration of Independence: A History, The U.S. National
       Archives and Records Administration
    6. ^ Stephen E. Lucas, "Justifying America: The Declaration of
       Independence as a Rhetorical Document", in Thomas W. Benson, ed.,
       American Rhetoric: Context and Criticism, Carbondale, Illinois:
       Southern Illinois University Press, 1989, p. 85
    7. ^ Ellis, American Creation, 55–56.
    8. ^ ^a ^b McPherson, Second American Revolution, 126.
    9. ^ David Armitage, The Declaration of Independence: A Global History
       (Harvard University Press, 2007) pp 103-4
   10. ^ Hazelton, Declaration History, 19.
   11. ^ Christie and Labaree, Empire or Independence, 31.
   12. ^ Bailyn, Ideological Origins, 162.
   13. ^ Bailyn, Ideological Origins, 200–02.
   14. ^ Bailyn, Ideological Origins, 180–82.
   15. ^ Middlekauff, Glorious Cause, 241.
   16. ^ Bailyn, Ideological Origins, 224–25.
   17. ^ Middlekauff, Glorious Cause, 241–42. The writings in question
       include Wilson's Considerations on the Authority of Parliament and
       Jefferson's A Summary View of the Rights of British America (both
       1774), as well as Samuel Adams's 1768 Circular Letter.
   18. ^ Middlekauff, Glorious Cause, 168; Ferling, Leap in the Dark,
       123–24.
   19. ^ Hazelton, Declaration History, 13; Middlekauff, Glorious Cause,
       318.
   20. ^ Middlekauff, Glorious Cause, 318.
   21. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 25. The text of the 1775 king's speech
       is online, published by the American Memory project.
   22. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 25.
   23. ^ Rakove, Beginnings of National Politics, 88–90.
   24. ^ Christie and Labaree, Empire or Independence, 270; Maier,
       American Scripture, 31–32.
   25. ^ Jensen, Founding, 667.
   26. ^ Rakove, Beginnings of National Politics, 89; Maier, American
       Scripture, 33.
   27. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 33–34.
   28. ^ Hazelton, Declaration History, 209; Maier, American Scripture,
       25–27.
   29. ^ Friedenwald, Interpretation, 67.
   30. ^ Friedenwald, Interpretation, 77.
   31. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 30.
   32. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 59.
   33. ^ Jensen, Founding, 671; Friedenwald, Interpretation, 78.
   34. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 48, and Appendix A, which lists the
       state and local declarations.
   35. ^ Jensen, Founding, 678–79.
   36. ^ Jensen, Founding, 679; Friedenwald, Interpretation, 92–93.
   37. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 69–72, quote on 72.
   38. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 48. The modern scholarly consensus is
       that the best-known and earliest of the local declarations, the
       Mecklenburg Declaration of Independence, allegedly adopted in May
       1775 (a full year before other local declarations), is most likely
       inauthentic; Maier, American Scripture, 174.
   39. ^ ^a ^b Jensen, Founding, 682.
   40. ^ Jensen, Founding, 683.
   41. ^ Jensen, Founding, 684; Maier, American Scripture, 37. For the
       full text of the May 10 resolve see the Journals of the Continental
       Congress.
   42. ^ Jensen, Founding, 684.
   43. ^ Burnett, Continental Congress, 159. The text of Adams's letter is
       online.
   44. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 37; Jensen, Founding, 684. For the
       full text of the May 15 preamble see the Journals of the
       Continental Congress.
   45. ^ Rakove, National Politics, 96; Jensen, Founding, 684;
       Friedenwald, Interpretation, 94.
   46. ^ Rakove, National Politics, 97; Jensen, Founding, 685.
   47. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 38.
   48. ^ Boyd, Evolution, 18; Maier, American Scripture, 63. The text of
       the May 15 Virginia resolution is online at Yale Law School's
       Avalon Project.
   49. ^ Jefferson, Thomas (1776-07-04). "Declaration of Independence. In
       Congress, July 4, 1776, a Declaration by the Representatives of the
       United States of America, in General Congress Assembled.". World
       Digital Library. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Retrieved 1 July
       2013.
   50. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 41; Boyd, Evolution, 19.
   51. ^ Jensen, Founding, 689–90; Maier, American Scripture, 42.
   52. ^ Jensen, Founding, 689; Armitage, Global History, 33–34. The quote
       is from Jefferson's notes; Boyd, Papers of Jefferson, 1:311.
   53. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 42–43; Friedenwald, Interpretation,
       106.
   54. ^ Jensen, Founding, 691–92.
   55. ^ Friedenwald, Interpretation, 106–07; Jensen, Founding, 691.
   56. ^ Jensen, Founding, 692.
   57. ^ Jensen, Founding, 693.
   58. ^ Jensen, Founding, 694.
   59. ^ Jensen, Founding, 694–96; Friedenwald, Interpretation, 96; Maier,
       American Scripture, 68.
   60. ^ Friedenwald, Interpretation, 118; Jensen, Founding, 698.
   61. ^ Friedenwald, Interpretation, 119–20.
   62. ^ Dupont and Onuf, 3.
   63. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 97–105; Boyd, Evolution, 21.
   64. ^ Boyd, Evolution, 22.
   65. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 104.
   66. ^ Becker, Declaration of Independence, 4.
   67. ^ Jensen, Founding, 701.
   68. ^ ^a ^b John E. Ferling, Setting the World Ablaze: Washington,
       Adams, Jefferson, and the American Revolution, Oxford University
       Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513409-4. OCLC 468591593, pp. 131–137
   69. ^ Burnett, Continental Congress, 181.
   70. ^ Jensen, Founding, 699.
   71. ^ Burnett, Continental Congress, 182; Jensen, Founding, 700.
   72. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 45.
   73. ^ Boyd, Evolution, 19.
   74. ^ Jensen, Founding, 703–04.
   75. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 160–61.
   76. ^ ^a ^b Maier, American Scripture, 146–50.
   77. ^ ^a ^b Julian P. Boyd, "The Declaration of Independence: The
       Mystery of the Lost Original". Pennsylvania Magazine of History and
       Biography 100, number 4 (October 1976), page 456
   78. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Lucas, Stephen E. "The Stylistic Artistry of the
       Declaration of Independence". National Archives and Records
       Administration. Retrieved 2012-07-04.
   79. ^ Danielle Allen, author, "Our Declaration," states there is a
       dash, not period after "pursuit of Happiness," in all 7 copies of
       document until the 8th copy in 1823. The second sentence is a very
       long sentence, according to Allen. The 1823 document is a bad copy.
   80. ^ The third sentence begins the indictment, according to Danielle
       Allen, author, "Our Declaration."
   81. ^ "Index of Signers by State". ushistory.org – Independence Hall
       Association in Philadelphia. Retrieved 2006-10-12.
   82. ^ "TO HENRY LEE — Thomas Jefferson The Works, vol. 12
       (Correspondence and Papers 1816–1826; 1905)". The Online Library of
       Liberty. May 8, 1825. Retrieved March 8, 2008.
   83. ^ Malone, Jefferson the Virginian, 221; Maier, American Scripture,
       125–26.
   84. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 126–28.
   85. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 53–57.
   86. ^ Maier found no evidence that the Dutch Act of Abjuration served
       as a model for the Declaration and considers the argument
       "unpersuasive" (American Scripture, p. 264). Armitage discounts the
       influence of the Scottish and Dutch acts, and writes that neither
       was called "declarations of independence" until fairly recently
       (Global History, pp. 42–44). For the argument in favor of the
       influence of the Dutch act, see Stephen E. Lucas, "The 'Plakkaat
       van Verlatinge': A Neglected Model for the American Declaration of
       Independence", in Rosemarijn Hofte and Johanna C. Kardux, eds.,
       Connecting Cultures: The Netherlands in Five Centuries of
       Transatlantic Exchange (Amsterdam, 1994), 189–207, and Barbara
       Wolff, "Was the Declaration of Independence Inspired by the Dutch?"
       University of Wisconsin Madison News, June 29, 1988,
       http://www.news.wisc.edu/3049 Accessed July 3, 2013
   87. ^ Boyd, Evolution, 16–17.
   88. ^ "The Three Greatest Men". Retrieved June 13, 2009. "Jefferson
       identified Bacon, Locke, and Newton as "the three greatest men that
       have ever lived, without any exception". Their works in the
       physical and moral sciences were instrumental in Jefferson's
       education and world view."
   89. ^ Becker, Declaration of Independence, 27.
   90. ^ Ray Forrest Harvey, Jean Jacques Burlamaqui: A Liberal Tradition
       in American Constitutionalism (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1937),
       120.
   91. ^ A brief, online overview of the classical liberalism vs.
       republicanism debate is Alec Ewald, "The American Republic:
       1760–1870" (2004). In a similar vein, historian Robert Middlekauff
       argues that the political ideas of the independence movement took
       their origins mainly from the "eighteenth-century commonwealthmen,
       the radical Whig ideology", which in turn drew on the political
       thought of John Milton, James Harrington, and John Locke. See
       Robert Middlekauff (2005), The Glorious Cause, pp. 3–6, 51–52, 136
   92. ^ Wills, Inventing America, especially chs. 11–13. Wills concludes
       (p. 315) that "the air of enlightened America was full of
       Hutcheson's politics, not Locke's".
   93. ^ Hamowy, "Jefferson and the Scottish Enlightenment", argues that
       Wills gets much wrong (p. 523), that the Declaration seems to be
       influenced by Hutcheson because Hutcheson was, like Jefferson,
       influenced by Locke (pp. 508–09), and that Jefferson often wrote of
       Locke's influence, but never mentioned Hutcheson in any of his
       writings (p. 514). See also Kenneth S. Lynn, "Falsifying
       Jefferson", Commentary 66 (Oct. 1978), 66–71. Ralph Luker, in
       "Garry Wills and the New Debate Over the Declaration of
       Independence" (The Virginia Quarterly Review, Spring 1980, 244–61)
       agreed that Wills overstated Hutcheson's influence to provide a
       communitarian reading of the Declaration, but he also argued that
       Wills's critics similarly read their own views into the document.
   94. ^ John Phillip Reid, "The Irrelevance of the Declaration", in
       Hendrik Hartog, ed., Law in the American Revolution and the
       Revolution in the Law (New York University Press, 1981), 46–89.
   95. ^ Mahoney, Declaration of Independence.
   96. ^ Benjamin Franklin to Charles F.W. Dumas, December 19, 1775, in
       The Writings of Benjamin Franklin, ed. Albert Henry Smyth (New
       York: 1970), 6:432.
   97. ^ Armitage, Global History, 21, 38–40.
   98. ^ Warren, "Fourth of July Myths", 242–43.
   99. ^ Hazelton, Declaration History, 299–302; Burnett, Continental
       Congress, 192.
   100. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d The U.S. State Department (1911), The Declaration of
       Independence, 1776, pp. 10, 11.
   101. ^ Warren, "Fourth of July Myths", 245–46; Hazelton, Declaration
       History, 208–19; Wills, Inventing America, 341.
   102. ^ Ritz, "Authentication", 179–200.
   103. ^ Ritz, "Authentication", 194.
   104. ^ Hazelton, Declaration History, 208–19.
   105. ^ Hazelton, Declaration History, 209.
   106. ^ Merriam-Webster online; Dictionary.com.
   107. ^ TeachAmericanHistory.org: John Hancock
   108. ^ Malone, Story of the Declaration, 91.
   109. ^ ^a ^b Maier, American Scripture, 156.
   110. ^ Armitage, Global History, 72.
   111. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 155.
   112. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 156–57.
   113. ^ Armitage, Global History, 73.
   114. ^ The Declaration of Independence in World Context
   115. ^ ^a ^b The Contagion of Sovereignty: Declarations of Independence
       since 1776
   116. ^ Armitage, Global History, 75.
   117. ^ Jessup, John J. (September 20, 1943). "America and the Future".
       Life: 105. Retrieved 09-03-2011.  Check date values in:
       |accessdate= (help)
   118. ^ Hutchinson, Thomas (1776). Eicholz, Hans, ed. Strictures upon
       the Declaration of the Congress at Philadelphia in a Letter to a
       Noble Lord, &c.. London: Liberty Fund. Retrieved 2012-11-07.
   119. ^ Armitage, Global History, 74.
   120. ^ Bailyn, Ideological Origins, 155–56.
   121. ^ Armitage, Global History, 79-80.
   122. ^ Armitage, Global History, 76-77.
   123. ^ Peter Kolchin, American Slavery, 1619–1877 (1993), pp. 77–79, 81
   124. ^ Quarles, Benjamin (August 1975). "Black America at the Time of
       the Revolutionary War". Ebony: 44, 45, 48. Retrieved 09-03-2011.
       Check date values in: |accessdate= (help)
   125. ^ ^a ^b ^c "The Declaration of Independence: A History". Charters
       of Freedom. National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved
       July 1, 2011.
   126. ^ Malone, Story of the Declaration, 263.
   127. ^ "Charters of Freedom Re-encasement Project". National Archives
       and Records Administration. Retrieved July 1, 2011.
   128. ^ "Rare copy of United States Declaration of Independence found in
       Kew". The Daily Telegraph. July 3, 2009. Retrieved July 1, 2011.
   129. ^ ^a ^b ^c Ann Marie Dube (May 1996). "The Declaration of
       Independence". A Multitude of Amendments, Alterations and
       Additions: The Writing and Publicizing of the Declaration of
       Independence, the Articles of Confederation, and the Constitution
       of the United States. National Park Service. Retrieved July 1,
       2011.
   130. ^ ^a ^b ^c Boyd, "Lost Original", 446.
   131. ^ Boyd, Papers of Jefferson, 1:421.
   132. ^ Becker, Declaration of Independence, 142 note 1. Boyd (Papers of
       Jefferson, 1:427–28) casts doubt on Becker's belief that the change
       was made by Franklin.
   133. ^ Boyd, "Lost Original", 448–50. Boyd argued that if a document
       was signed on July 4—which he thought unlikely—it would have been
       the Fair Copy, and probably would have been signed only by Hancock
       and Thomson.
   134. ^ Ritz, "From the Here", speculates that the Fair Copy was
       immediately sent to the printer so that copies could be made for
       each member of Congress to consult during the debate. All of these
       copies were then destroyed, theorizes Ritz, to preserve secrecy.
   135. ^ Armitage, Global History, 87–88; Maier, American Scripture, 162,
       168–69.
   136. ^ McDonald, "Jefferson's Reputation", 178–79; Maier, American
       Scripture, 160.
   137. ^ Armitage, Global History, 92.
   138. ^ Armitage, Global History, 90; Maier, American Scripture, 165–67.
   139. ^ ^a ^b Maier, American Scripture, 167.
   140. ^ Armitage, Global History, 82.
   141. ^ Georges Lefebvre (2005). The Coming of the French Revolution.
       Princeton UP. p. 212.
   142. ^ George Athan Billias, ed. (2009). American Constitutionalism
       Heard Round the World, 1776-1989: A Global Perspective. NYU Press.
       p. 92.
   143. ^ Susan Dunn, Sister Revolutions: French Lightning, American Light
       (1999) pp 143-45
   144. ^ Armitage, Global History, 113.
   145. ^ Armitage, Global History, 120–35.
   146. ^ Armitage, Global History, 104, 113.
   147. ^ Palley, Claire (1966). The Constitutional History and Law of
       Southern Rhodesia 1888–1965, with Special Reference to Imperial
       Control (First ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 750. OCLC 406157.
   148. ^ Hillier, Tim (1998). Sourcebook on Public International Law
       (First ed.). London & Sydney: Cavendish Publishing. p. 207.
       ISBN 1-85941-050-2.
   149. ^ Gowlland-Debbas, Vera (1990). Collective Responses to Illegal
       Acts in International Law: United Nations action in the question of
       Southern Rhodesia (First ed.). Leiden and New York: Martinus
       Nijhoff Publishers. p. 71. ISBN 0-7923-0811-5.
   150. ^ McDonald, "Jefferson's Reputation", 172.
   151. ^ McDonald, "Jefferson's Reputation", 172, 179.
   152. ^ McDonald, "Jefferson's Reputation", 179; Maier, American
       Scripture, 168–71.
   153. ^ McDonald, "Jefferson's Reputation", 180–84; Maier, American
       Scripture, 171.
   154. ^ Wills, Inventing America, 348.
   155. ^ Detweiler, "Changing Reputation", 571–72; Maier, American
       Scripture, 175–78.
   156. ^ Detweiler, "Changing Reputation", 572; Maier, American
       Scripture, 175.
   157. ^ Detweiler, "Changing Reputation", 572; Maier, American
       Scripture, 175–76; Wills, Inventing America, 324. See also John C.
       Fitzpatrick, Spirit of the Revolution (Boston 1924).
   158. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 176.
   159. ^ Wills, Inventing America, 90.
   160. ^ Armitage, "Global History", 93.
   161. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 196–97.
   162. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 197. See also Philip S. Foner, ed.,
       We, the Other People: Alternative Declarations of Independence by
       Labor Groups, Farmers, Woman's Rights Advocates, Socialists, and
       Blacks, 1829–1975 (Urbana 1976).
   163. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 197; Armitage, Global History, 95.
   164. ^ Cohen (1969), Thomas Jefferson and the Problem of Slavery
   165. ^ (1) Armitage, Global History, 77.
       (2) Day, Thomas. "Fragment of an original letter on the Slavery of
       the Negroes, written in the year 1776". London: Printed for John
       Stockdale (1784). Boston: Re-printed by Garrison and Knapp, at the
       office of "The Liberator" (1831). p. 10. Retrieved 2014-02-26. "If
       there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an American
       patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and
       with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves."  At:
       Internet Archive: The Johns Hopkins University Sheridan Libraries:
       James Birney Collection of Antislavery Pamphlets.
   166. ^ Wyatt-Brown, Lewis Tappan, 287.
   167. ^ Mayer, All on Fire, 53, 115.
   168. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 198–99.
   169. ^ Detweiler, "Congressional Debate", 598.
   170. ^ Detweiler, "Congressional Debate", 604.
   171. ^ Detweiler, "Congressional Debate", 605.
   172. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 199; Bailyn, Ideological Origins,
       246.
   173. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 200.
   174. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 200–01.
   175. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 201–02.
   176. ^ McPherson, Second American Revolution, 126–27.
   177. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 204.
   178. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 204–05.
   179. ^ "Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865): Political Debates Between Lincoln
       and Douglas 1897, p. 415.". Bartleby. Retrieved 26 January 2013.
   180. ^ Maier, American Scripture, 207.
   181. ^ Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg, 100.
   182. ^ Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg, 129–31.
   183. ^ Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg, 145.
   184. ^ Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg, 147.
   185. ^ Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg, 39, 145–46. See also Harry V.
       Jaffa, Crisis of the House Divided (1959) and A New Birth of
       Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War (2000);
       Willmoore Kendall and George W. Carey, The Basic Symbols of the
       American Political Tradition (1970); and M.E. Bradford, "The Heresy
       of Equality: A Reply to Harry Jaffa" (1976), reprinted in A Better
       Guide than Reason (1979) and Modern Age, the First Twenty-five
       Years (1988).
   186. ^ Norton, et al (2010), p. 301.
   187. ^ Modern History Sourcebook: Seneca Falls: The Declaration of
       Sentiments, 1848

Bibliography

   Main article: Bibliography of Thomas Jefferson
     * Armitage, David. The Declaration Of Independence: A Global History,
       Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2007. ISBN
       978-0-674-02282-9.
     * Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American
       Revolution. Enlarged edition. Originally published 1967. Harvard
       University Press, 1992. ISBN 0-674-44302-0.
     * Becker, Carl. The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the
       History of Political Ideas. 1922. Available online from The Online
       Library of Liberty and Google Book Search. Revised edition New
       York: Vintage Books, 1970. ISBN 0-394-70060-0.
     * Boyd, Julian P. The Declaration of Independence: The Evolution of
       the Text. Originally published 1945. Revised edition edited by
       Gerard W. Gawalt. University Press of New England, 1999. ISBN
       0-8444-0980-4.
     * Boyd, Julian P., ed. The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, vol. 1.
       Princeton University Press, 1950.
     * Boyd, Julian P. "The Declaration of Independence: The Mystery of
       the Lost Original". Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography
       100, number 4 (October 1976), 438–67.
     * Burnett, Edward Cody. The Continental Congress. New York: Norton,
       1941.
     * Christie, Ian R. and Benjamin W. Labaree. Empire or Independence,
       1760–1776: A British-American Dialogue on the Coming of the
       American Revolution. New York: Norton, 1976.
     * Detweiler, Philip F. "Congressional Debate on Slavery and the
       Declaration of Independence, 1819–1821", American Historical Review
       63 (April 1958): 598–616. in JSTOR
     * Detweiler, Philip F. "The Changing Reputation of the Declaration of
       Independence: The First Fifty Years". William and Mary Quarterly,
       3rd series, 19 (1962): 557–74. in JSTOR
     * Dumbauld, Edward. The Declaration of Independence And What It Means
       Today. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1950.
     * Ellis, Joseph. American Creation: Triumphs and Tragedies at the
       Founding of the Republic. New York: Knopf, 2007. ISBN
       978-0-307-26369-8.
     * Dupont, Christian Y. and Peter S. Onuf, eds. Declaring
       Independence: The Origina and Influence of America's Founding
       Document. Revised edition. Charlottesville, Virginia: University of
       Virginia Library, 2010. ISBN 978-0-9799997-1-0.
     * Ferling, John E. A Leap in the Dark: The Struggle to Create the
       American Republic. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN
       0-19-515924-1.
     * Friedenwald, Herbert. The Declaration of Independence: An
       Interpretation and an Analysis. New York: Macmillan, 1904. Accessed
       via the Internet Archive.
     * Gustafson, Milton. "Travels of the Charters of Freedom". Prologue
       Magazine 34, no 4. (Winter 2002).
     * Hamowy, Ronald. "Jefferson and the Scottish Enlightenment: A
       Critique of Garry Wills's Inventing America: Jefferson's
       Declaration of Independence". William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd
       series, 36 (October 1979), 503–23.
     * Hazelton, John H. The Declaration of Independence: Its History.
       Originally published 1906. New York: Da Capo Press, 1970. ISBN
       0-306-71987-8. 1906 edition available on Google Book Search
     * Journals of the Continental Congress,1774–1789, Vol. 5 ( Library of
       Congress, 1904–1937)
     * Jensen, Merrill. The Founding of a Nation: A History of the
       American Revolution, 1763–1776. New York: Oxford University Press,
       1968.
     * Mahoney, D. J. (1986). "Declaration of independence". Society 24:
       46–48. doi:10.1007/BF02695936.  edit
     * Lucas, Stephen E., "Justifying America: The Declaration of
       Independence as a Rhetorical Document", in Thomas W. Benson, ed.,
       American Rhetoric: Context and Criticism, Carbondale, Illinois:
       Southern Illinois University Press, 1989
     * Maier, Pauline. American Scripture: Making the Declaration of
       Independence. New York: Knopf, 1997. ISBN 0-679-45492-6.
     * Malone, Dumas. Jefferson the Virginian. Volume 1 of Jefferson and
       His Time. Boston: Little Brown, 1948.
     * Mayer, David (2008). "Declaration of Independence". In Hamowy,
       Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA:
       SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 113–5. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4.
       LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
     * Mayer, Henry. All on Fire: William Lloyd Garrison and the Abolition
       of Slavery. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1998. ISBN 0-312-18740-8.
     * McDonald, Robert M. S. "Thomas Jefferson's Changing Reputation as
       Author of the Declaration of Independence: The First Fifty Years".
       Journal of the Early Republic 19, no. 2 (Summer 1999): 169–95.
     * McPherson, James. Abraham Lincoln and the Second American
       Revolution. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991. ISBN
       0-19-505542-X.
     * Middlekauff, Robert. The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution,
       1763–1789. Revised and expanded edition. New York: Oxford
       University Press, 2005.
     * Norton, Mary Beth, et al., A People and a Nation, Eighth Edition,
       Boston, Wadsworth, 2010. ISBN 0-547-17558-2.
     * Rakove, Jack N. The Beginnings of National Politics: An
       Interpretive History of the Continental Congress. New York: Knopf,
       1979. ISBN 0-8018-2864-3
     * Ritz, Wilfred J. "The Authentication of the Engrossed Declaration
       of Independence on July 4, 1776". Law and History Review 4, no. 1
       (Spring 1986): 179–204.
     * Ritz, Wilfred J. "From the Here of Jefferson's Handwritten Rough
       Draft of the Declaration of Independence to the There of the
       Printed Dunlap Broadside". Pennsylvania Magazine of History and
       Biography 116, no. 4 (October 1992): 499–512.
     * Tsesis, Alexander. For Liberty and Equality: The Life and Times of
       the Declaration of Independence (Oxford University Press; 2012) 397
       pages; explores the impact on American politics, law, and society
       since its drafting.
     * Warren, Charles. "Fourth of July Myths". The William and Mary
       Quarterly, Third Series, vol. 2, no. 3 (July 1945): 238–72. in
       JSTOR
     * United States Department of State, "The Declaration of
       Independence, 1776, 1911.
     * Wills, Garry. Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of
       Independence. Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1978. ISBN
       0-385-08976-7.
     * Wills, Garry. Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Rewrote
       America. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992. ISBN 0-671-76956-1.
     * Wyatt-Brown, Bertram. Lewis Tappan and the Evangelical War Against
       Slavery. Cleveland: Press of Case Western Reserve University, 1969.
       ISBN 0-8295-0146-0.

External links

   Listen to this article (2 parts) · (info)
   Part 1 • Part 2
   This audio file was created from a revision of the "United States
   Declaration of Independence" article dated 2006-11-18, and does not
   reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
   More spoken articles
   Sound-icon.svg
   Wikisource has original text related to this article:
   United States Declaration of Independence

   Quotations related to United States Declaration of Independence at
   Wikiquote Media related to United States Declaration of Independence at
   Wikimedia Commons
     * "Declare the Causes: The Declaration of Independence" lesson plan
       for grades 9-12 from National Endowment for the Humanities
     * Declaration of Independence at the National Archives
     * Declaration of Independence at the Library of Congress
     * "The Stylistic Artistry of the Declaration of Independence" by
       Stephen E. Lucas
     * Short film released in 2002 with actors reading the Declaration,
       with an introduction by Morgan Freeman
     * Mobile-Friendly Declaration of Independence
     * Various editions of the Declaration of Independence at the Online
       Books Page

   Loyalist Responses to the Declaration of Independence
     * Strictures upon the Declaration of the Congress at Philadelphia
       (London 1776), Thomas Hutchinson's reaction to the Declaration
     * The Loyalist Declaration of Independence published in The Royal
       Gazette, (New York) on November 17, 1781 (Transcription provided by
       Bruce Wallace and posted on The On-Line Institute for Advanced
       Loyalist Studies.)


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Historical documents of the United States


   Constitution

Preamble & Articles
                      * Preamble
                      * I
                      * II
                      * III
                      * IV
                      * V
                      * VI
                      * VII

    Amendments

                      Ratified
                                  * 1
                                  * 2
                                  * 3
                                  * 4
                                  * 5
                                  * 6
                                  * 7
                                  * 8
                                  * 9
                                  * 10
                                  * 11
                                  * 12
                                  * 13
                                  * 14
                                  * 15
                                  * 16
                                  * 17
                                  * 18
                                  * 19
                                  * 20
                                  * 21
                                  * 22
                                  * 23
                                  * 24
                                  * 25
                                  * 26
                                  * 27

                      Pending
                                  * Congressional Apportionment
                                  * Titles of Nobility
                                  * Corwin (State Domestic Institutions)
                                  * Child Labor

                    Unsuccessful
                                  * Equal Rights
                                  * District of Columbia Voting Rights

                      See also
                                  * List of Constitutional Amendments
                                  * Bill of Rights (Amendments 1-10)
                                  * Reconstruction Amendments (Amendments 13-15)
                                  * Amendment proposal in Congress
                                  * Conventions to propose amendments
                                  * State ratifying conventions

     Formation
                      * History
                      * Articles of Confederation
                      * Mount Vernon Conference
                      * Annapolis Convention
                      * Philadelphia Convention
                           + Virginia Plan
                           + New Jersey Plan
                           + Connecticut Compromise
                           + Three-Fifths Compromise
                           + Committee of Detail
                           + Signing
                           + Independence Hall
                           + Syng inkstand
                      * Federalist Papers
                      * Anti-Federalist Papers
                      * Massachusetts Compromise
                      * Virginia Ratifying Convention
                      * Drafting and ratification timeline

      Clauses
                      * Appointments
                      * Appropriations
                      * Assistance of Counsel
                      * Bill of credit
                      * Case or Controversy
                      * Citizenship
                      * Commerce
                      * Compact
                      * Compulsory Process
                      * Confrontation
                      * Contract
                      * Copyright and Patent
                      * Double Jeopardy
                      * Due Process
                      * Equal Protection
                      * Establishment
                      * Exceptions
                      * Excessive Bail
                      * Ex post facto
                      * Extradition
                      * Free Exercise
                      * Free Speech
                      * Fugitive Slave
                      * Full Faith and Credit
                      * General Welfare
                      * Guarantee
                      * Impeachment
                      * Ineligibility (Emolument)
                      * Militia
                      * Natural-born citizen
                      * Necessary and Proper
                      * No Religious Test
                      * Origination
                      * Petition
                      * Postal
                      * Presentment
                      * Privileges and Immunities
                      * Privileges or Immunities
                      * Recommendation
                      * Self-Incrimination
                      * Speech or Debate
                      * Speedy Trial
                      * State of the Union
                      * Supremacy
                      * Suspension
                      * Take Care
                      * Takings
                      * Taxing and Spending
                      * Territorial
                      * Title of Nobility
                      * Treaty
                      * Trial by Jury
                      * Vesting
                      * Vicinage
                      * War Powers
                      * List of clauses

  Interpretation
                      * Concurrent powers
                      * Congressional enforcement
                      * Constitutional law
                      * Criminal procedure
                      * Criminal sentencing
                      * Dormant Commerce Clause
                      * Enumerated powers
                      * Executive privilege
                      * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
                      * Judicial review
                      * Nondelegation doctrine
                      * Preemption
                      * Saxbe fix
                      * Separation of church and state
                      * Separation of powers
                      * Taxation power
                      * Unitary executive theory

    Signatories

                    Convention President
                                          * George Washington

                       New Hampshire
                                          * John Langdon
                                          * Nicholas Gilman

                       Massachusetts
                                          * Nathaniel Gorham
                                          * Rufus King

                        Connecticut
                                          * William Samuel Johnson
                                          * Roger Sherman

                          New York
                                          * Alexander Hamilton

                         New Jersey
                                          * William Livingston
                                          * David Brearley
                                          * William Paterson
                                          * Jonathan Dayton

                        Pennsylvania
                                          * Benjamin Franklin
                                          * Thomas Mifflin
                                          * Robert Morris
                                          * George Clymer
                                          * Thomas Fitzsimons
                                          * Jared Ingersoll
                                          * James Wilson
                                          * Gouverneur Morris

                          Delaware
                                          * George Read
                                          * Gunning Bedford, Jr.
                                          * John Dickinson
                                          * Richard Bassett
                                          * Jacob Broom

                          Maryland
                                          * James McHenry
                                          * Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer
                                          * Daniel Carroll

                          Virginia
                                          * John Blair
                                          * James Madison

                       North Carolina
                                          * William Blount
                                          * Richard Dobbs Spaight
                                          * Hugh Williamson

                       South Carolina
                                          * John Rutledge
                                          * Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
                                          * Charles Pinckney
                                          * Pierce Butler

                          Georgia
                                          * William Few
                                          * Abraham Baldwin

                    Convention Secretary
                                          * William Jackson


   Declaration of Independence

   Primary author
                    * Thomas Jefferson

    Signatories

                  President of Congress
                                         * John Hancock (Massachusetts)

                      New Hampshire
                                         * Josiah Bartlett
                                         * William Whipple
                                         * Matthew Thornton

                      Massachusetts
                                         * Samuel Adams
                                         * John Adams
                                         * Robert Treat Paine
                                         * Elbridge Gerry

                      Rhode Island
                                         * Stephen Hopkins
                                         * William Ellery

                       Connecticut
                                         * Roger Sherman
                                         * Samuel Huntington
                                         * William Williams
                                         * Oliver Wolcott

                        New York
                                         * William Floyd
                                         * Philip Livingston
                                         * Francis Lewis
                                         * Lewis Morris

                       New Jersey
                                         * Richard Stockton
                                         * John Witherspoon
                                         * Francis Hopkinson
                                         * John Hart
                                         * Abraham Clark

                      Pennsylvania
                                         * Robert Morris
                                         * Benjamin Rush
                                         * Benjamin Franklin
                                         * John Morton
                                         * John Clymer
                                         * James Smith
                                         * George Taylor
                                         * James Wilson
                                         * George Ross

                        Delaware
                                         * George Reed
                                         * Caesar Rodney
                                         * Thomas McKean

                        Maryland
                                         * Samuel Chase
                                         * William Paca
                                         * Thomas Stone
                                         * Charles Carroll of Carrollton

                        Virginia
                                         * George Wythe
                                         * Richard Henry Lee
                                         * Thomas Jefferson
                                         * Benjamin Harrison
                                         * Thomas Nelson, Jr.
                                         * Francis Lightfoot Lee
                                         * Carter Braxton

                     North Carolina
                                         * William Hooper
                                         * Joseph Hewes
                                         * John Penn

                     South Carolina
                                         * Edward Rutledge
                                         * Thomas Heyward, Jr.
                                         * Thomas Lynch, Jr.
                                         * Arthur Middleton

                         Georgia
                                         * Button Gwinett
                                         * Lyman Hall
                                         * George Walton

      See also
                    * Committee of Five
                    * Physical history
                    * Second Continental Congress
                    * "All men are created equal"
                    * "Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness"
                    * Independence Hall
                         + Syng inkstand


   Articles of Confederation

   Signatories

               Primary drafter
                                * John Dickinson

                New Hampshire
                                * Josiah Bartlett
                                * John Wentworth, Jr.

                Massachusetts
                                * John Hancock
                                * Samuel Adams
                                * Elbridge Gerry
                                * Francis Dana
                                * James Lovell
                                * Samuel Holten

                Rhode Island
                                * William Ellery
                                * Henry Marchant
                                * John Collins

                 Connecticut
                                * Roger Sherman
                                * Samuel Huntington
                                * Oliver Wolcott
                                * Titus Hosmer
                                * Andrew Adams

                  New York
                                * James Duane
                                * Francis Lewis
                                * William Duer
                                * Gouverneur Morris

                 New Jersey
                                * John Witherspoon
                                * Nathaniel Scudder

                Pennsylvania
                                * Robert Morris
                                * Daniel Roberdeau
                                * Jonathan Bayard Smith
                                * William Clingan
                                * Joseph Reed

                  Delaware
                                * Thomas McKean
                                * John Dickinson
                                * Nicholas Van Dyke

                  Maryland
                                * John Hanson
                                * Daniel Carroll

                  Virginia
                                * Richard Henry Lee
                                * John Banister
                                * Thomas Adams
                                * John Harvie
                                * Francis Lightfoot Lee

               North Carolina
                                * John Penn
                                * Cornelius Harnett
                                * John Williams

               South Carolina
                                * Henry Laurens
                                * William Henry Drayton
                                * John Mathews
                                * Richard Hutson
                                * Thomas Heyward, Jr.

                   Georgia
                                * John Walton
                                * Edward Telfair
                                * Edward Langworthy

    See also
                 * Continental Congress


   Continental Association

   Signatories

               President of Congress
                                      * Peyton Randolph

                   New Hampshire
                                      * John Sullivan
                                      * Nathaniel Folsom

                 Massachusetts Bay
                                      * Thomas Cushing
                                      * Samuel Adams
                                      * John Adams
                                      * Robert Treat Paine

                   Rhode Island
                                      * Stephen Hopkins
                                      * Samuel Ward

                    Connecticut
                                      * Eliphalet Dyer
                                      * Roger Sherman
                                      * Silas Deane

                     New York
                                      * Isaac Low
                                      * John Alsop
                                      * John Jay
                                      * James Duane
                                      * Philip Livingston
                                      * William Floyd
                                      * Henry Wisner
                                      * Simon Boerum

                    New Jersey
                                      * James Kinsey
                                      * William Livingston
                                      * Stephen Crane
                                      * Richard Smith
                                      * John De Hart

                   Pennsylvania
                                      * Joseph Galloway
                                      * John Dickinson
                                      * Charles Humphreys
                                      * Thomas Mifflin
                                      * Edward Biddle
                                      * John Morton
                                      * George Ross


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Thomas Jefferson
     * April 13 (O.S. April 2) 1743 – July 4, 1826

     * 3rd President of the United States (1801–1809)
     * 2nd U.S. Vice President (1797–1801)
     * 1st U.S. Secretary of State (1790–1793)
     * U.S. Minister to France (1785–1789)
     * 2nd Governor of Virginia (1779–1781)
     * Delegate, Second Continental Congress (1775–1776)

   Founding
   documents
     * A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774)
     * Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775)
     * Declaration of Independence (1776)
          + Committee of Five
          + authored
          + physical history
          + "All men are created equal"
          + "Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness"
     * Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (1786)

   Presidency
     * Inaugural Address (1801
     * 1805)
     * Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves
     * Cumberland Road
     * Embargo Act of 1807
          + Chesapeake–Leopard Affair
          + Non-Intercourse Act of 1809
     * First Barbary War
     * Lewis and Clark Expedition
          + timeline
     * Louisiana Purchase
          + Empire of Liberty
     * Marbury v. Madison
     * Pike Expedition
     * Red River Expedition
     * Indian policy
     * West Point Military Academy
     * State of the Union Addresses (texts
     * 1801
     * 1802
     * 1805)
     * Cabinet
     * Federal judicial appointments

   Other noted
   accomplishments
     * Early life and career
     * University of Virginia
          + history
     * A Manual of Parliamentary Practice (1801)
     * Democratic-Republican Party
          + First Party System
          + republicanism
     * Land Ordinance of 1784
          + Northwest Ordinance 1787
     * Jeffersonian democracy
     * Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
     * Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and
       Measure of the United State (1790)

   Other writings
     * Notes of the State of Virginia (1785)
     * 1787 European journey memorandums
     * Indian removal letters
     * Jefferson Bible (1895)
     * Jefferson manuscript collection at the Massachusetts Historical
       Society

   Jeffersonian
   architecture
     * Barboursville
     * Farmington
     * Monticello
          + gardens
     * Poplar Forest
     * University of Virginia
          + The Rotunda
          + The Lawn
     * Virginia State Capitol
     * White House Colonnades

   Related
     * American Enlightenment
     * American Philosophical Society
     * Committee of the States
     * Founding Fathers
     * Jefferson and education
     * Jefferson and religion
     * Jefferson and slavery
     * Jefferson and the Library of Congress
     * Jefferson disk
     * Jefferson Pier
     * Pet mockingbird
     * National Gazette
     * Residence Act
          + Compromise of 1790
     * Sally Hemings
          + Jefferson–Hemings controversy
          + Betty Hemings
     * Separation of church and state
     * Swivel chair
     * The American Museum magazine
     * Virginia dynasty

   Elections
     * United States Presidential election 1796
     * 1800
     * 1804

   Legacy
     * Bibliography
     * Birthday holiday
     * Jefferson Memorial
     * Mount Rushmore
     * Thomas Jefferson Building
     * Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression
     * Jefferson College
     * Jefferson National Expansion Memorial
     * Monticello Association
     * Jefferson City, Missouri
     * Washington and Jefferson National Forests
     * Other placenames
     * Two-dollar bill
     * Jefferson nickel
     * Jefferson postage stamps
          + examples

   Popular culture
     * Ben and Me (1953 short)
     * 1776 (1969 musical
     * 1972 film)
     * Jefferson in Paris (1995 film)
     * Thomas Jefferson (1997 film)
     * Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
     * Jefferson–Eppes Trophy
     * Wine bottles controversy

   Family
     * Peter Jefferson (father)
     * Jane Randolph Jefferson (mother)
     * Lucy Jefferson Lewis (sister)
     * Randolph Jefferson (brother)
     * Isham Randolph (grandfather)
     * William Randolph (great-grandfather)
     * Martha Jefferson (wife)
     * Martha Jefferson Randolph (daughter)
     * Mary Jefferson Eppes (daughter)
     * Harriet Hemings (daughter)
     * Madison Hemings (son)
     * Eston Hemings (son)
     * Thomas Jefferson Randolph (grandson)
     * Francis Eppes (grandson)
     * George W. Randolph (grandson)
     * John Wayles Jefferson (grandson)
     * Frederick Roberts (great-grandson)
     * Thomas Randolph, Jr. (son-in-law)
     * John Wayles Eppes (son-in-law)
     * John Wayles (father-in-law)
     * Dabney Carr (brother-in-law)
     * Dabney Carr (nephew)
     * Peyton Randolph (cousin)
     * Richard Bland (cousin)
     * Edmund Randolph (second-cousin)
     * Charles Lewis (cousin, brother-in-law)

     * ← John Adams
     * James Madison →

     * Commons page Commons
     * Wikibooks page Wikibooks
     * Wikiquote page Wikiquote
     * Wikisource page Wikisource
     * American Revolutionary War Portal


     * v
     * t
     * e

   John Adams
     * October 30, 1735 – July 4, 1826

     * 2nd President of the United States, 1797–1801
     * 1st Vice President of the United States, 1789–1797
     * U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom, 1785–1788
     * U.S. Ambassador to the Netherlands, 1782–1788
     * Delegate, First Continental Congress, 1774–1775
     * Delegate, Second Continental Congress, 1775–1778

   Founding of the
   United States
     * Braintree Instructions (1765)
     * Boston Massacre defense
     * Continental Association
     * Novanglus; A History of the Dispute with America, From Its Origin
       in 1754 to the Present Time (1775)
     * Thoughts on Government (1776)
     * Declaration of Independence
          + May 15 preamble
          + Committee of Five
     * Model Treaty
          + Treaty of Amity and Commerce
          + Treaty of Alliance
     * Board of War
     * Continental Navy
     * Staten Island Peace Conference
          + Conference House
     * Treaty of Paris, 1783

   Presidency
     * Inauguration
     * Quasi War with France
          + XYZ Affair
          + Commerce Protection Act
          + United States Marine Corps
          + Convention of 1800
     * Alien and Sedition Act
     * Naturalization Act of 1798
     * Navy Department Library
     * Treaty of Tellico
     * Treaty of Tripoli
     * Midnight Judges Act
          + Marbury v. Madison
     * State of the Union Address (1797
     * 1798
     * 1799
     * 1800)
     * Cabinet
     * Federal judiciary appointments

   Other writings
     * Constitution of Massachusetts
     * Massachusetts Historical Society holdings

   Life and
   homes
     * Early life and education
     * Adams National Historical Park
          + John Adams Birthplace
          + Family home and John Quincy Adams birthplace
          + Peacefield
          + Presidential Library
     * Massachusetts Hall, Harvard University
     * Presidents House, Philadelphia
     * Founding President, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
     * United First Parish Church and gravesite

   Elections
     * United States Presidential election 1788–1789
     * 1792
     * 1796
     * 1800

   Legacy
     * Adams House at Harvard University
     * John Adams Building
     * Postage stamps
     * Adams Memorial

   Popular culture
     * 1776 (1969 musical
     * 1972 film)
     * The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries)
     * Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
     * John Adams (2001 book
     * 2008 miniseries)
     * Sons of Liberty (2014 miniseries)

   Family
     * Abigail Adams (wife
     * Quincy family)
     * Abigail Adams Smith (daughter)
     * John Quincy Adams (son, presidency)
     * Charles Adams (son)
     * Thomas Boylston Adams (son)
     * George W. Adams (grandson)
     * Charles Adams, Sr. (grandson)
     * John Adams (grandson)
     * John Q. Adams (great-grandson)
     * Henry Adams (great-grandson)
     * Brooks Adams (great-grandson)
     * John Adams, Sr. (father)
     * Susanna Boylston (mother)
     * Elihu Adams (brother)
     * Samuel Adams (cousin)
     * Louisa Adams (daughter-in-law, First Lady)

   Related
     * Adams and Liberty campaign song
     * Adams' personal library
     * American Enlightenment
     * Congress Hall
     * Federalist Party
          + First Party System
          + republicanism
     * American Philosophical Society
     * Gazette of the United States
     * The American Museum

     * ← George Washington
     * Thomas Jefferson →

     * Commons page Commons
     * Wikibooks page Wikibooks
     * Wikiquote page Wikiquote
     * Wikisource page Wikisource
     * American Revolutionary War Portal


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Benjamin Franklin

                       January 6, 1706-April 17, 1790

              Delegate, Second Continental Congress (1775-1776)

   Founding of the
   United States
     * 'Join, or Die' (1754 political cartoon)
     * Albany Plan of Union
          + Albany Congress
     * Committee of Five
     * Declaration of Independence
     * Model Treaty
          + Treaty of Amity and Commerce
          + Treaty of Alliance
     * Staten Island Peace Conference
     * Treaty of Paris, 1783
     * Delegate, 1787 Constitutional Convention
     * President of Pennsylvania
     * Pennsylvania Provincial Assembly
     * Ambassador to France
     * Ambassador to Sweden
     * Postmaster General
     * Founding Fathers

   Inventions,
   other events
     * Bifocals
     * Franklin stove
     * Glass armonica
     * Gulf Stream exploration, naming, and chart
     * Lightning rod
     * Kite experiment
     * Pay it forward
     * Associators
          + 111th Infantry Regiment
     * Junto club
     * American Philosophical Society
     * Library Company of Philadelphia
     * Pennsylvania Hospital
     * The Academy and College of Philadelphia
          + University of Pennsylvania
     * Philadelphia Contributionship
     * Union Fire Company
     * Early American currency
     * United States Postal Service
     * President, Pennsylvania Abolition Society
     * Social contributions and studies

   Writings
     * Silence Dogood letters (1722)
     * A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain (1725)
     * Pennsylvania Gazette (1729-1790)
     * Poor Richard's Almanack (1732-1758)
     * Advice to a Friend on Choosing a Mistress (1745)
     * The Speech of Polly Baker (1747)
     * Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of
       Countries, etc. (1751)
     * Birch letters (1755)
     * The Way to Wealth (1758)
     * Pennsylvania Chronicle (1767)
     * Rules by Which a Great Empire May Be Reduced to a Small One (1773)
     * Proposed alliance with the Iroquois (1775)
     * A Letter To A Royal Academy (1781)
     * Remarks Concerning the Savages of North America (1784)
     * The Morals of Chess (1786)
     * An Address to the Public (1789)
     * A Plan for Improving the Condition of the Free Blacks (1789)
     * The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (1771-1790, pub. 1791)
     * Bagatelles and Satires (pub. 1845)
     * Franklin as a journalist

   Legacy
     * Franklin Court
     * Benjamin Franklin House
     * Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology
     * Benjamin Franklin National Memorial
     * Franklin Institute
     * Benjamin Franklin Medal
     * Popular culture
          + Ben and Me (1953 short)
          + Ben Franklin in Paris (1964 musical play)
          + 1776 (1969 musical
          + 1972 film)
          + Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
          + Sons of Liberty (2014 miniseries)
     * Franklin half dollar
     * One-hundred dollar bill
     * Washington-Franklin stamps
          + other stamps
     * Cities, counties, schools named for Franklin
     * Franklin Field
     * State of Franklin
     * USS Franklins
     * Ben Franklin effect

   Family
     * Mary Morrill (grandmother)
     * Josiah Franklin (father)
     * Jane Mecom (sister)
     * James Franklin (brother)
     * Deborah Read (wife)
     * Sarah Franklin Bache (daughter)
     * Francis Franklin (son)
     * William Franklin (son)
     * Richard Bache (son-in-law)
     * Ann Smith Franklin (sister-in-law)
     * Richard Bache Jr. (grandson)
     * Benjamin F. Bache (grandson)
     * Louis F. Bache (grandson)
     * William Franklin (grandson)
     * Andrew Harwood (grandson)
     * Jonathan Williams (grandnephew)
     * Alexander Bache (great-grandson)
     * Benjamin F. Bache (great-grandson)
     * Agnes Irwin (great-great granddaughter)
     * Richard Wainwright (great-great-grandson)
     * George Bache (great-great grandson)
     * Daniel Brewster (great-great-great grandson)
     * Richard Wainwright (great-great-great grandson)

   Related
     * American Enlightenment
     * The New-England Courant
     * The American Museum magazine
     * Syng inkstand

     * Commons page Commons
     * Wikibooks page Wikibooks
     * Wikiquote page Wikiquote
     * Wikisource page Wikisource
     * American Revolutionary War Portal


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Origins of the American Revolution: writings
   American resolves, declarations, petitions, essays and pamphlets prior
   to the Declaration of Independence (July 1776)
   Following the
   Stamp Act (1765)
     * Virginia Resolves (May 1765)
     * Braintree Instructions (September 1765)
     * Declaration of Rights and Grievances (October 1765)
     * An Inquiry into the Rights of the British Colonies (1766)

   Following the
   Townshend Acts (1767)
     * Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania (1767, 1768)
     * Massachusetts Circular Letter (February 1768)
     * Boston Pamphlet (1772)
     * Sheffield Declaration (January 1773)

   Following the
   Coercive Acts (1774)
   Maryland
     * Chestertown Resolves (May 1774)
     * Bush River Resolution (March 1775)

   Massachusetts
     * Suffolk Resolves (September 1774)

   New York
     * Orangetown Resolutions (July 1774)
     * A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress (1774)
     * The Farmer Refuted (1775)

   North Carolina
     * Mecklenburg Resolves or Declaration (May 1775)
     * Liberty Point Resolves (June 1775)
     * Tryon Resolves (August 1775)
     * Halifax Resolves (April 1776)

   Virginia
     * Fairfax Resolves (July 1774)
     * Fincastle Resolutions (January 1775)
     * Virginia Declaration of Rights (June 1776)

   1st Continental
   Congress
     * Declaration and Resolves (October 1774)
     * Continental Association (October 1774)
     * Petition to the King (October 1774)

   2nd Continental
   Congress
     * Olive Branch Petition (July 1775)
     * Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (July
       1775)
     * May 15 preamble (May, 1776)
     * Lee Resolution (July 1776)

   Essays and pamphlets
     * Letters to the inhabitants of Canada (1774, 1775, 1776)
     * A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774)
     * Novanglus (1775)
     * Common Sense (1776)
     * Thoughts on Government (1776)


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Pennsylvania during the American Revolutionary War
   1774
     * First Continental Congress
     * Articles of Association

   Independence Hall belltower.jpg
   1775
     * Independence Hall
     * Second Continental Congress

   1776
     * United States Declaration of Independence
     * Pennsylvania Constitution
     * Washington Crosses the Delaware

   1777
     * Articles of Confederation
     * Philadelphia campaign
     * Battle of Brandywine
     * Battle of the Clouds
     * Liberty Bell moved to Allentown
     * Battle of Paoli
     * Battle of Germantown
     * Siege of Fort Mifflin
     * Battle of White Marsh
     * Battle of Matson's Ford
     * Valley Forge

   1778
     * Battle of Crooked Billet
     * Battle of Barren Hill
     * British occupation of Philadelphia ends
     * Wyoming Valley battle and massacre

   1781
     * Congress of the Confederation
     * Mutiny of the Pennsylvania Line

   1783
     * 1783 Mutiny

   This is a good article. Click here for more information.

   Authority control
                       * WorldCat
                       * VIAF: 179420344
                       * LCCN: n79029194
                       * GND: 4187277-0

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Declaration_of
   _Independence&oldid=625804349"
   Categories:
     * United States Declaration of Independence
     * American Revolution
     * Continental Congress
     * Independence Day (United States)
     * History of the United States (1776–89)
     * National human rights instruments
     * Official documents of the United States
     * Thomas Jefferson
     * United States historical documents
     * 1776 in law
     * 1776 in the United States
     * 1776 works
     * American Enlightenment
     * American political philosophy literature

   Hidden categories:
     * CS1 errors: dates
     * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
     * All self-contradictory articles
     * Self-contradictory articles from March 2013
     * Spoken articles
     * Good articles
     * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
     * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
     * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
     * World Digital Library related

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * View source
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Aragonés
     * Azərbaycanca
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Bosanski
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Cymraeg
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Eesti
     * Ελληνικά
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * فارسی
     * Føroyskt
     * Français
     * Galego
     * 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
     * 한국어
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Ido
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Íslenska
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * ქართული
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * Lëtzebuergesch
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * मराठी
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Oʻzbekcha
     * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Slovenščina
     * کوردی
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * ไทย
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 粵語
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 16 September 2014 at 12:20.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
