   #alternate Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia Atom feed

American Civil War

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
     (Redirected from United States Civil War)
   Jump to: navigation, search
   Page semi-protected
   American Civil War
   American Civil War Montage.jpg
   Clockwise from top left: Battle of Stones River; Confederate prisoners
   of war; Battle of Fort Hindman.

     Date   April 12, 1861 – May 9, 1865 (by declaration)^[1]
            (4 years, 3 weeks and 6 days)
            (last shot fired June 22, 1865)
   Location Southern United States, Northeastern United States, Western
            United States, Atlantic Ocean
    Result  Union victory
              * Slavery abolished
              * Territorial integrity preserved
              * Lincoln assassinated five days after Lee's surrender
              * Dissolution of the Confederacy
              * Beginning of the Reconstruction Era

   Belligerents
    United States  Confederate States
   Commanders and leaders
   Abraham Lincoln†

   Edwin M. Stanton
   Ulysses S. Grant
   William T. Sherman
   David Farragut
   David D. Porter

                                 and others

   Jefferson Davis

   Judah P. Benjamin
   Robert E. Lee
   Joseph E. Johnston
   Raphael Semmes
   Josiah Tattnall

                                 and others

   Strength
   2,100,000 1,064,000
   Casualties and losses
   110,000 Army killed in action/dead of wounds^[2]
   25,000 Army dead in Confederate prisons^[2]
   2,260 Navy/Marines killed^[3]
   ~ 365,000 total dead^[4]
   275,200 wounded 75,000 killed in action/dead of wounds (incomplete
   data)^[3]
   26,000–31,000 Army dead in Union prisons^[3]
   ~260,000 total dead
   137,000+ wounded

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Theaters of the American Civil War
     * Union blockade
     * Eastern
     * Western
     * Lower Seaboard
     * Trans-Mississippi
     * Pacific Coast

   The American Civil War, widely known in the United States as simply the
   Civil War as well as other sectional names, was fought from 1861 to
   1865. Seven Southern slave states individually declared their secession
   from the United States and formed the Confederate States of America,
   known as the "Confederacy" or the "South". They grew to include eleven
   states, and although they claimed thirteen states and additional
   western territories, the Confederacy was never recognized by a foreign
   country. The states that did not declare secession were known as the
   "Union" or the "North". The war had its origin in the fractious issue
   of slavery, especially the extension of slavery into the western
   territories.^[N 1] After four years of bloody combat that left over
   600,000 Union and Confederate soldiers dead, and destroyed much of the
   South's infrastructure, the Confederacy collapsed, slavery was
   abolished, and the difficult Reconstruction process of restoring
   national unity and guaranteeing civil rights to the freed slaves began.

   In the 1860 presidential election, Republicans, led by Abraham Lincoln,
   opposed the expansion of slavery into US territories. Lincoln won, but
   before his inauguration on March 4, 1861, seven slave states with
   cotton-based economies formed the Confederacy. The first six to secede
   had the highest proportions of slaves in their populations, a total of
   48.8% for the six.^[5] Outgoing Democratic President James Buchanan and
   the incoming Republicans rejected secession as illegal. Lincoln's
   inaugural address declared his administration would not initiate civil
   war. Eight remaining slave states continued to reject calls for
   secession. Confederate forces seized numerous federal forts within
   territory claimed by the Confederacy. A peace conference failed to find
   a compromise, and both sides prepared for war. The Confederates assumed
   that European countries were so dependent on "King Cotton" that they
   would intervene; none did and none recognized the new Confederate
   States of America.

   Hostilities began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces fired upon
   Fort Sumter, a key fort held by Union troops in South Carolina. Lincoln
   called for each state to provide troops to retake the fort;
   consequently, four more slave states joined the Confederacy, bringing
   their total to eleven. The Union soon controlled the border states and
   established a naval blockade that crippled the southern economy. The
   Eastern Theater was inconclusive in 1861–62. The autumn 1862
   Confederate campaign into Maryland (a Union state) ended with
   Confederate retreat at the Battle of Antietam, dissuading British
   intervention.^[6] Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which
   made ending slavery a war goal.^[7] To the west, by summer 1862 the
   Union destroyed the Confederate river navy, then much of their western
   armies, and the Union siege of Vicksburg split the Confederacy in two
   at the Mississippi River. In 1863, Robert E. Lee's Confederate
   incursion north ended at the Battle of Gettysburg. Western successes
   led to Ulysses S. Grant's command of all Union armies in 1864. In the
   Western Theater, William T. Sherman drove east to capture Atlanta and
   marched to the sea, destroying Confederate infrastructure along the
   way. The Union marshaled the resources and manpower to attack the
   Confederacy from all directions, leading to the protracted Siege of
   Petersburg. The besieged Confederate army eventually abandoned
   Richmond, seeking to regroup at Appomattox Court House, though there
   they found themselves surrounded by union forces. This led to Lee's
   surrender to Grant on April 9, 1865. All Confederate generals
   surrendered by that summer.

   The American Civil War was one of the earliest true industrial wars.
   Railroads, the telegraph, steamships, and mass-produced weapons were
   employed extensively. The mobilization of civilian factories, mines,
   shipyards, banks, transportation and food supplies all foreshadowed
   World War I. It remains the deadliest war in American history,
   resulting in the deaths of an estimated 750,000 soldiers and an
   undetermined number of civilian casualties.^[N 2] One estimate of the
   death toll is that ten percent of all Northern males 20–45 years old,
   and 30 percent of all Southern white males aged 18–40 perished.^[9]
   From 1861 to 1865 about 620,000 soldiers lost their lives.^[10]

Contents

     * 1 Causes of secession
          + 1.1 Slavery
          + 1.2 States' rights
          + 1.3 Sectionalism
               o 1.3.1 Protectionism
               o 1.3.2 Slave power and free soil
          + 1.4 Territorial crisis
          + 1.5 National elections
               o 1.5.1 Nationalism and honor
               o 1.5.2 Lincoln's election
     * 2 Secession and war begins
          + 2.1 Resolves and developments
               o 2.1.1 Secession of South Carolina
               o 2.1.2 Secession winter
          + 2.2 States align
               o 2.2.1 Confederate states
               o 2.2.2 Union states
               o 2.2.3 Border states
          + 2.3 Beginning the war
               o 2.3.1 Lincoln's policy
               o 2.3.2 Battle of Fort Sumter
     * 3 The War
          + 3.1 Mobilization
               o 3.1.1 Motivation
               o 3.1.2 Prisoners
          + 3.2 Naval war
               o 3.2.1 Union blockade
                    # 3.2.1.1 Modern navy evolves
                    # 3.2.1.2 Blockade runners
                    # 3.2.1.3 Economic impact
               o 3.2.2 Rivers
          + 3.3 Eastern theater
          + 3.4 Western theater
          + 3.5 Trans-Mississippi
          + 3.6 End of war
               o 3.6.1 Conquest of Virginia
               o 3.6.2 Confederacy surrenders
     * 4 Diplomacy
     * 5 Victory and aftermath
          + 5.1 Results
          + 5.2 Costs
          + 5.3 Emancipation
               o 5.3.1 Issue of Slavery During the War
               o 5.3.2 Emancipation Proclamation
          + 5.4 Texas v. White
          + 5.5 Reconstruction
     * 6 Memory and historiography
          + 6.1 Lost Cause
          + 6.2 Beardian historiography
          + 6.3 Civil War commemoration
     * 7 See also
     * 8 References
     * 9 Further reading
     * 10 External links

Causes of secession

   Main articles: Origins of the American Civil War, Timeline of events
   leading to the American Civil War and History of the United States

   The causes of the Civil War were complex and have been controversial
   since the war began. The issue has been further complicated by
   historical revisionists, who have tried to offer a variety of reasons
   for the war.^[11] Slavery was the central source of escalating
   political tension in the 1850s. The Republican Party was determined to
   prevent any spread of slavery, and many Southern leaders had threatened
   secession if the Republican candidate, Lincoln, won the 1860 election.
   After Lincoln had won without carrying a single Southern state, many
   Southern whites felt that disunion had become their only option,
   because they felt as if they were losing representation, which hampered
   their ability to promote pro-slavery acts and policies.^[12]

Slavery

   Main article: Slavery in the United States

   The slavery issue was primarily about whether the system of slavery was
   an anachronistic evil that was incompatible with Republicanism in the
   United States, or a state-based property system protected by the
   Constitution.^[13] The strategy of the anti-slavery forces was
   containment — to stop the expansion and thus put slavery on a path to
   gradual extinction.^[14] To slave holding interests in the South, this
   strategy was perceived as infringing upon their Constitutional
   rights.^[15] Slavery was being phased out of existence in the North and
   was fading in the border states and urban areas, but was expanding in
   highly profitable cotton districts of the south.
   An 1863 photo of Gordon, distributed in the North during the war.^[16]

   Despite compromises in 1820 and 1850, the slavery issues exploded in
   the 1850s. Causes include controversy over admitting Missouri as a
   slave state in 1820, the acquisition of Texas as a slave state in 1845
   and the status of slavery in western territories won as a result of the
   Mexican–American War and the resulting Compromise of 1850.^[17]
   Following the U.S. victory over Mexico, Northerners attempted to
   exclude slavery from conquered territories in the Wilmot Proviso;
   although it passed the House, it failed in the Senate. Northern (and
   British) readers recoiled in anger at the horrors of slavery as
   described in the novel and play Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852) by
   abolitionist Harriet Beecher Stowe.^[18]^[19] Irreconcilable
   disagreements over slavery ended the Whig and Know Nothing political
   parties, and later split the Democratic Party between North and South,
   while the new Republican Party angered slavery interests by demanding
   an end to its expansion. Most observers believed that without expansion
   slavery would eventually die out; Lincoln argued this in 1845 and
   1858.^[20]^[21]

   Meanwhile, the South of the 1850s saw an increasing number of slaves
   leave the border states through sale, manumission and escape. During
   this same period, slave-holding border states had more free
   African-Americans and European immigrants than the lower South, which
   increased Southern fears that slavery was threatened with rapid
   extinction in this area.^[22] With tobacco and cotton wearing out the
   soil, the South believed it needed to expand slavery.^[23] Some
   advocates for the Southern states argued in favor of reopening the
   international slave trade to populate territory that was to be newly
   opened to slavery.^[24] Southern demands for a slave code to ensure
   slavery in the territories repeatedly split the Democratic Party
   between North and South by widening margins.^[25]^[N 3]

   To settle the dispute over slavery expansion, Abolitionists and
   proslavery elements sent their partisans into Kansas, both using
   ballots and bullets. In the 1850s, a miniature civil war in Bleeding
   Kansas led pro-South Presidents Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan to
   attempt a forced admission of Kansas as a slave state through vote
   fraud.^[30] The 1857 Congressional rejection of the pro-slavery
   Lecompton Constitution was the first multi-party solid-North vote, and
   that solid vote was anti-slavery to support the democratic majority
   voting in the Kansas Territory.^[31] Violence on behalf of Southern
   honor reached the floor of the Senate in 1856 when a Southern
   Congressman, Preston Brooks, physically assaulted Republican Senator
   Charles Sumner when he ridiculed prominent slaveholders as pimps for
   slavery.^[32]

   The earlier political party structure failed to make accommodation
   among sectional differences. Disagreements over slavery caused the Whig
   and "Know-Nothing" parties to collapse. In 1860, the last national
   political party, the Democratic Party, split along sectional lines.
   Anti-slavery Northerners mobilized in 1860 behind moderate Abraham
   Lincoln because he was most likely to carry the doubtful western
   states. In 1857, the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision ended the
   Congressional compromise for Popular Sovereignty in Kansas. According
   to the court, slavery in the territories was a property right of any
   settler, regardless of the majority there. Chief Justice Taney's
   decision said that slaves were "... so far inferior that they had no
   rights which the white man was bound to respect". The decision
   overturned the Missouri Compromise, which banned slavery in territory
   north of the 36°30' parallel.^[33]
   Members of slave-owning planter aristocracy dominated society and
   politics in the South.

   Republicans denounced the Dred Scott decision and promised to overturn
   it; Abraham Lincoln warned that the next Dred Scott decision could
   threaten the Northern states with slavery. The Republican party
   platform called slavery "a national evil", and Lincoln believed it
   would die a natural death if it were contained.^[34] The Democrat
   Stephen A. Douglas developed the Freeport Doctrine to appeal to North
   and South. Douglas argued, Congress could not decide either for or
   against slavery before a territory was settled. Nonetheless, the
   anti-slavery majority in Kansas could stop slavery with its own local
   laws if their police laws did not protect slavery introduction.^[35]
   Most 1850 political battles followed the arguments of Lincoln and
   Douglas, focusing on the issue of slavery expansion in the
   territories.^[20]

   But political debate was cut short throughout the South with Northern
   abolitionist John Brown's 1859 raid at Harpers Ferry Armory in an
   attempt to incite slave insurrections. The Southern political defense
   of slavery transformed into widespread expansion of local militias for
   armed defense of their "peculiar" domestic institution.^[36] Lincoln's
   assessment of the political issue for the 1860 elections was that,
   "This question of Slavery was more important than any other; indeed, so
   much more important has it become that no other national question can
   even get a hearing just at present."^[N 4] The Republicans gained
   majorities in both House and Senate for the first time since the 1856
   elections, they were to be seated in numbers that Lincoln might use to
   govern, a national parliamentary majority even before pro-slavery House
   and Senate seats were vacated.^[39] Meanwhile, Southern Vice President,
   Alexander Stephens, in the Cornerstone Speech, declared the new
   confederate "Constitution has put at rest forever all the agitating
   questions relating to our peculiar institutions—African slavery as it
   exists among us—the proper status of the negro in our form of
   civilization. This was the immediate cause of the late rupture and
   present revolution."^[40] The Republican administration enacted the
   Confiscation Acts that set conditions for emancipation of slaves prior
   to the official proclamation of emancipation.^[41] Likewise, Lincoln
   had previously condemned slavery and called for its "extinction."^[42]

   Considering the relative weight given to causes of the Civil War by
   contemporary actors, historians such as Chandra Manning argue that both
   Union and Confederate fighting soldiers believed that slavery caused
   the Civil War. Union men mainly believed the war was to emancipate the
   slaves. Confederates fought to protect southern society, and slavery as
   an integral part of it.^[43] Addressing the causes, Eric Foner would
   relate a historical context with multidimensional political, social and
   economic variables. The several causes united in the moment by a
   consolidating nationalism. A social movement that was individualist,
   egalitarian and perfectionist grew to a political democratic majority
   attacking slavery, and slavery's defense in the Southern pre-industrial
   traditional society brought the two sides to war.^[44]

States' rights

   Main article: States' rights
   Men lined up along a tree line are shot by men on horseback.
   Marais des Cygnes massacre of anti-slavery Kansans. May 19, 1858.

   Everyone agreed that states had certain rights—but did those rights
   carry over when a citizen left that state? The Southern position was
   that citizens of every state had the right to take their property
   anywhere in the U.S. and not have it taken away—specifically they could
   bring their slaves anywhere and they would remain slaves. Northerners
   rejected this "right" because it would violate the right of a free
   state to outlaw slavery within its borders. Republicans committed to
   ending the expansion of slavery were among those opposed to any such
   right to bring slaves and slavery into the free states and territories.
   The Dred Scott Supreme Court decision of 1857 bolstered the Southern
   case within territories, and angered the North.^[45]

   Secondly, the South argued that each state had the right to
   secede—leave the Union—at any time, that the Constitution was a
   "compact" or agreement among the states. Northerners (including
   President Buchanan) rejected that notion as opposed to the will of the
   Founding Fathers who said they were setting up a "perpetual
   union".^[45] Historian James McPherson writes concerning states' rights
   and other non-slavery explanations:
   “ While one or more of these interpretations remain popular among the
     Sons of Confederate Veterans and other Southern heritage groups, few
     professional historians now subscribe to them. Of all these
     interpretations, the state's-rights argument is perhaps the weakest. It
     fails to ask the question, state's rights for what purpose? State's
     rights, or sovereignty, was always more a means than an end, an
     instrument to achieve a certain goal more than a principle.^[46]       ”

Sectionalism

   Map of U.S. showing two kinds of Union states, two phases of secession
   and territories.

                         Status of the states, 1861.

      States that seceded before April 15, 1861
      States that seceded after April 15, 1861
      Union states that permitted slavery
      Union states that banned slavery
      Territories

   Sectionalism refers to the different economies, social structure,
   customs and political values of the North and South.^[47]^[48] It
   increased steadily between 1800 and 1860 as the North, which phased
   slavery out of existence, industrialized, urbanized and built
   prosperous farms, while the deep South concentrated on plantation
   agriculture based on slave labor, together with subsistence farming for
   the poor whites. The South expanded into rich new lands in the
   Southwest (from Alabama to Texas).^[49]

   However, slavery declined in the border states and could barely survive
   in cities and industrial areas (it was fading out in cities such as
   Baltimore, Louisville, and St. Louis), so a South based on slavery was
   rural and non-industrial. On the other hand, as the demand for cotton
   grew, the price of slaves soared. Historians have debated whether
   economic differences between the industrial Northeast and the
   agricultural South helped cause the war. Most historians now disagree
   with the economic determinism of historian Charles Beard in the 1920s
   and emphasize that Northern and Southern economies were largely
   complementary. While socially different, the sections economically
   benefited each other.^[50]^[51]

   Fears of slave revolts and abolitionist propaganda made the South
   militantly hostile to abolitionism.^[52]^[53] Southerners complained
   that it was the North that was changing, and was prone to new "isms",
   while the South remained true to historic republican values of the
   Founding Fathers (many of whom owned slaves, including Washington,
   Jefferson, and Madison). Lincoln said that Republicans were following
   the tradition of the framers of the Constitution (including the
   Northwest Ordinance and the Missouri Compromise) by preventing
   expansion of slavery.^[54]

   In the 1840s and 50s, the issue of accepting slavery (in the guise of
   rejecting slave-owning bishops and missionaries) split the nation's
   largest religious denominations (the Methodist, Baptist and
   Presbyterian churches) into separate Northern and Southern
   denominations.^[55] Industrialization meant that seven European
   immigrants out of eight settled in the North. The movement of twice as
   many whites leaving the South for the North as vice versa contributed
   to the South's defensive-aggressive political behavior.^[56]

Protectionism

   Main articles: King Cotton, Protectionism in the United States and
   Infant industry
   New Orleans the largest cotton exporting port for New England and Great
   Britain textile mills, shipping Mississippi River Valley goods from
   North, South and Border states.

   Historically, southern slave-holding states, because of their low cost
   manual labor, had little perceived need for mechanization, and
   supported having the right to sell cotton and purchase manufactured
   goods from any nation. Northern states, which had heavily invested in
   their still-nascent manufacturing, could not compete with the
   full-fledged industries of Europe in offering high prices for cotton
   imported from the South and low prices for manufactured exports in
   return. Thus, northern manufacturing interests supported tariffs and
   protectionism while southern planters demanded free trade.^[57]

   The Democrats in Congress, controlled by Southerners, wrote the tariff
   laws in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s, and kept reducing rates so that
   the 1857 rates were the lowest since 1816. The South had no complaints
   but the low rates angered Northern industrialists and factory workers,
   especially in Pennsylvania, who demanded protection for their growing
   iron industry. The Whigs and Republicans complained because they
   favored high tariffs to stimulate industrial growth, and Republicans
   called for an increase in tariffs in the 1860 election. The increases
   were finally enacted in 1861 after Southerners resigned their seats in
   Congress.^[58]^[59]

   Historians in the 1920s emphasized the tariff issue but since the 1950s
   they have minimized it, noting that few Southerners in 1860–61 said it
   was of central importance to them. Some secessionist documents do
   mention the tariff issue, though not nearly as often as the
   preservation of slavery.

Slave power and free soil

   Main article: Slave Power
   "A Ride for Liberty" (1862). An unassisted family of fugitive slaves
   charges for the safety of Union lines.

   Antislavery forces in the North identified the "Slave Power" as a
   direct threat to republican values. They argued that rich slave owners
   were using political power to take control of the Presidency, Congress
   and the Supreme Court, thus threatening the rights of the citizens of
   the North.^[N 5]^[60]

   "Free soil" was a Northern demand that the new lands opening up in the
   west be available to independent yeoman farmers and not be bought out
   by rich slave owners who would buy up the best land and work it with
   slaves, forcing the white farmers onto marginal lands. This was the
   basis of the Free Soil Party of 1848, and a main theme of the
   Republican Party.^[61] Free Soilers and Republicans demanded a
   homestead law that would give government land to settlers; it was
   defeated by Southerners who feared it would attract to the west
   European immigrants and poor Southern whites.^[62]

Territorial crisis

   Further information: Slave and free states

   Between 1803 and 1854, the United States achieved a vast expansion of
   territory through purchase, negotiation, and conquest. Of the states
   carved out of these territories by 1845, all had entered the union as
   slave states: Louisiana, Missouri, Arkansas, Florida and Texas, as well
   as the southern portions of Alabama and Mississippi. These were
   balanced by new free states created within the U.S.' original boundary
   east of the Mississippi River, and the free state of Iowa in 1846. With
   the conquest of northern Mexico, including California in 1848,
   slaveholding interests looked forward to the institution flourishing in
   much of these lands as well. Southerners also anticipated garnering
   slaves and slave states in Cuba and Central America.^[63]^[64] Northern
   free soil interests vigorously sought to curtail any further expansion
   of slave soil. It was these territorial disputes that the proslavery
   and antislavery forces collided over.^[65] The Compromise of 1850 over
   California, tried again to reach some political settlement on these
   issues.

   The existence of slavery in the southern states was far less
   politically polarizing than the explosive question of the territorial
   expansion of the institution westward.^[66] Moreover, Americans were
   informed by two well-established readings of the Constitution regarding
   human bondage: first, that the slave states had complete autonomy over
   the institution within their boundaries, and second, that the domestic
   slave trade – trade among the states – was immune to federal
   interference.^[67]^[68] The only feasible strategy available to attack
   slavery was to restrict its expansion into the new territories.^[69]
   Slaveholding interests fully grasped the danger that this strategy
   posed to them.^[70] Both the South and the North drew the same
   conclusion: "The power to decide the question of slavery for the
   territories was the power to determine the future of slavery
   itself."^[71]^[72]

       Sen. Stephen Douglas, author of the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854

    Sen. John J. Crittenden, author of the Crittenden Compromise bill of
                                    1860

   By 1860, four doctrines had emerged to answer the question of federal
   control in the territories, and they all claimed they were sanctioned
   by the Constitution, implicitly or explicitly. Two of the
   "conservative" doctrines emphasized the written text and historical
   precedents of the founding document (specifically, the Northwest
   Ordinance and the Missouri Compromise), while the other two doctrines
   developed arguments that transcended the Constitution.^[73]

   The first of these "conservative" theories, represented by the
   Constitutional Union Party, argued that the historical designation of
   free and slave apportionments in territories (as done in the Missouri
   Compromise) should become a Constitutional mandate. The Crittenden
   Compromise of 1860 was an expression of this view.^[74]

   The second doctrine of Congressional preeminence, championed by Abraham
   Lincoln and the Republican Party, insisted that the Constitution did
   not bind legislators to a policy of balance – that slavery could be
   excluded altogether (as done in the Northwest Ordinance) in a territory
   at the discretion of Congress^[75] – with one caveat: the due process
   clause of the Fifth Amendment must apply. In other words, Congress
   could restrict human bondage, but never establish it. The Wilmot
   Proviso announced this position in 1846.^[76]

   Of the two doctrines that rejected federal authority, one was
   articulated by northern Democrat of Illinois Senator Stephen A.
   Douglas, and the other by southern Democratic Senator Jefferson Davis
   of Mississippi and Vice-President John C. Breckinridge of
   Kentucky.^[77]

   Douglas proclaimed the doctrine of territorial or "popular"
   sovereignty, which declared that the settlers in a territory had the
   same rights as states in the Union to establish or disestablish slavery
   – a purely local matter. Congress, having created the territory, was
   barred, according to Douglas, from exercising any authority in domestic
   matters. To do so would violate historic traditions of self-government,
   implicit in the US Constitution.^[78] The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854
   legislated this doctrine.^[79] In Kansas Territory, years of pro and
   anti-slavery violence and political conflict erupted; the congressional
   House of Representatives voted to admit Kansas as a free state in early
   1860, but its admission in the Senate was delayed until after the 1860
   elections, when southern senators began to leave.^[80]

   The fourth in this quartet is the theory of state sovereignty ("states'
   rights"),^[81] also known as the "Calhoun doctrine",^[82] named after
   the South Carolinian political theorist and statesman John C.
   Calhoun.^[83] Rejecting the arguments for federal authority or
   self-government, state sovereignty would empower states to promote the
   expansion of slavery as part of the Federal Union under the US
   Constitution – and not merely as an argument for secession. The basic
   premise was that all authority regarding matters of slavery in the
   territories resided in each state. The role of the federal government
   was merely to enable the implementation of state laws when residents of
   the states entered the territories.^[84] The Calhoun doctrine asserted
   that the federal government in the territories was only the agent of
   the several sovereign states, and hence incapable of forbidding the
   bringing into any territory of anything that was legal property in any
   state. State sovereignty, in other words, gave the laws of the
   slaveholding states extra-jurisdictional effect.^[85]

   "States' rights" was an ideology formulated and applied as a means of
   advancing slave state interests through federal authority.^[86] As
   historian Thomas L. Krannawitter points out, the "Southern demand for
   federal slave protection represented a demand for an unprecedented
   expansion of federal power."^[87]^[88]

   By 1860, these four doctrines comprised the major ideologies presented
   to the American public on the matters of slavery, the territories and
   the US Constitution.^[89]

National elections

   Beginning in the American Revolution and accelerating after the War of
   1812, the people of the United States grew in their sense of country as
   an important example to the world of a national republic of political
   liberty and personal rights. Previous regional independence movements
   such as the Greek revolt in the Ottoman Empire, division and redivision
   in the Latin American political map, and the British-French Crimean
   triumph leading to an interest in redrawing Europe along cultural
   differences, all conspired to make for a time of upheaval and
   uncertainty about the basis of the nation-state. In the world of 19th
   century self-made Americans, growing in prosperity, population and
   expanding westward, "freedom" could mean personal liberty or property
   rights. The unresolved difference would cause failure—first in their
   political institutions, then in their civil life together.

Nationalism and honor

   Middle-aged man in a beard posed sitting in a suit, vest and bowtie.

                               Abraham Lincoln
                      16th U.S. President (1861–1865)

   Nationalism was a powerful force in the early 19th century, with famous
   spokesmen such as Andrew Jackson and Daniel Webster. While practically
   all Northerners supported the Union, Southerners were split between
   those loyal to the entire United States (called "unionists") and those
   loyal primarily to the southern region and then the Confederacy.^[90]
   C. Vann Woodward said of the latter group, "A great slave society ...
   had grown up and miraculously flourished in the heart of a thoroughly
   bourgeois and partly puritanical republic. It had renounced its
   bourgeois origins and elaborated and painfully rationalized its
   institutional, legal, metaphysical, and religious defenses ... When the
   crisis came it chose to fight. It proved to be the death struggle of a
   society, which went down in ruins."^[91] Perceived insults to Southern
   collective honor included the enormous popularity of Uncle Tom's Cabin
   (1852)^[92] and the actions of abolitionist John Brown in trying to
   incite a slave rebellion in 1859.^[93]

   While the South moved toward a Southern nationalism, leaders in the
   North were also becoming more nationally minded, and rejected any
   notion of splitting the Union. The Republican national electoral
   platform of 1860 warned that Republicans regarded disunion as treason
   and would not tolerate it: "We denounce those threats of disunion ...
   as denying the vital principles of a free government, and as an avowal
   of contemplated treason, which it is the imperative duty of an
   indignant people sternly to rebuke and forever silence."^[94] The South
   ignored the warnings: Southerners did not realize how ardently the
   North would fight to hold the Union together.^[95]

Lincoln's election

   Main article: United States presidential election, 1860

   The election of Lincoln in November 1860 was the final trigger for
   secession.^[96] Efforts at compromise, including the "Corwin Amendment"
   and the "Crittenden Compromise", failed. Southern leaders feared that
   Lincoln would stop the expansion of slavery and put it on a course
   toward extinction. The slave states, which had already become a
   minority in the House of Representatives, were now facing a future as a
   perpetual minority in the Senate and Electoral College against an
   increasingly powerful North. Before Lincoln took office in March 1861,
   seven slave states had declared their secession and joined to form the
   Confederacy.

Secession and war begins

   The first published imprint of secession

Resolves and developments

Secession of South Carolina

   See also: Antebellum South Carolina

   South Carolina did more to advance nullification and secession than any
   other Southern state. South Carolina adopted the "Declaration of the
   Immediate Causes Which Induce and Justify the Secession of South
   Carolina from the Federal Union" on December 24, 1860. It argued for
   states' rights for slave owners in the South, but contained a complaint
   about states' rights in the North in the form of opposition to the
   Fugitive Slave Act, claiming that Northern states were not fulfilling
   their federal obligations under the Constitution.

Secession winter

   Before Lincoln took office, seven states had declared their secession
   from the Union. They established a Southern government, the Confederate
   States of America on February 4, 1861.^[97] They took control of
   federal forts and other properties within their boundaries with little
   resistance from outgoing President James Buchanan, whose term ended on
   March 4, 1861. Buchanan said that the Dred Scott decision was proof
   that the South had no reason for secession, and that the Union "... was
   intended to be perpetual," but that, "The power by force of arms to
   compel a State to remain in the Union," was not among the
   "... enumerated powers granted to Congress."^[98] One quarter of the
   U.S. Army—the entire garrison in Texas—was surrendered in February 1861
   to state forces by its commanding general, David E. Twiggs, who then
   joined the Confederacy.

   As Southerners resigned their seats in the Senate and the House,
   Republicans were able to pass bills for projects that had been blocked
   by Southern Senators before the war, including the Morrill Tariff, land
   grant colleges (the Morill Act), a Homestead Act, a transcontinental
   railroad (the Pacific Railway Acts),^[99] the National Banking Act and
   the authorization of United States Notes by the Legal Tender Act of
   1862. The Revenue Act of 1861 introduced the income tax to help finance
   the war.

States align

Confederate states

   Main article: Confederate States of America
   Middle-aged man in a goatee posed standing in a suit, vest and bowtie
   Jefferson Davis, President of Confederacy (1861–1865)

   Seven Deep South cotton states seceded by February 1861, starting with
   South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and
   Texas. These seven states formed the Confederate States of America
   (February 4, 1861), with Jefferson Davis as president, and a
   governmental structure closely modeled on the U.S. Constitution.

   Following the attack on Fort Sumter, President Lincoln called for a
   volunteer army from each state. Within two months, an additional four
   Southern slave states declared their secession and joined the
   Confederacy: Virginia, Arkansas, North Carolina and Tennessee. The
   northwestern portion of Virginia subsequently seceded from Virginia,
   joining the Union as the new state of West Virginia on June 20, 1863.
   By the end of 1861, Missouri and Kentucky were effectively under Union
   control, with Confederate state governments in exile.

   Among the ordinances of secession passed by the individual states,
   those of three – Texas, Alabama, and Virginia – specifically mentioned
   the plight of the 'slaveholding states' at the hands of northern
   abolitionists. The rest make no mention of the slavery issue, and are
   often brief announcements of the dissolution of ties by the
   legislatures.^[100] However, at least four states – South
   Carolina,^[101] Mississippi,^[102] Georgia,^[103] and Texas^[104] –
   also passed lengthy and detailed explanations of their causes for
   secession, all of which laid the blame squarely on the influence over
   the northern states of the movement to abolish slavery, something
   regarded as a Constitutional right by the slaveholding states.^[105]

Union states

   Main article: Union (American Civil War)

   Twenty-three states remained loyal to the Union: California,
   Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
   Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New
   Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode
   Island, Vermont, and Wisconsin. During the war, Nevada and West
   Virginia joined as new states of the Union. Tennessee and Louisiana
   were returned to Union military control early in the war.

   The territories of Colorado, Dakota, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico,
   Utah, and Washington fought on the Union side. Several slave-holding
   Native American tribes supported the Confederacy, giving the Indian
   Territory (now Oklahoma) a small, bloody civil war.^[106]^[107]^[108]

Border states

   Main article: Border states (American Civil War)

   The border states in the Union were West Virginia (which separated from
   Virginia and became a new state), and four of the five northernmost
   slave states (Maryland, Delaware, Missouri, and Kentucky).

   Maryland had numerous pro-Confederate officials who tolerated
   anti-Union rioting in Baltimore and the burning of bridges. Lincoln
   responded with martial law and sent in militia units from the
   North.^[109] Before the Confederate government realized what was
   happening, Lincoln had seized firm control of Maryland and the District
   of Columbia, by arresting all the prominent secessionists and holding
   them without trial (they were later released).
   Map of U.S. showing three new states, with two kinds of Confederate
   territorial control.
   The Union: blue, yellow (slave);
   The Confederacy: brown
   *territories in light shades; control of Confederate territories
   disputed

   In Missouri, an elected convention on secession voted decisively to
   remain within the Union. When pro-Confederate Governor Claiborne F.
   Jackson called out the state militia, it was attacked by federal forces
   under General Nathaniel Lyon, who chased the governor and the rest of
   the State Guard to the southwestern corner of the state. (See also:
   Missouri secession). In the resulting vacuum, the convention on
   secession reconvened and took power as the Unionist provisional
   government of Missouri.^[110]

   Kentucky did not secede; for a time, it declared itself neutral. When
   Confederate forces entered the state in September 1861, neutrality
   ended and the state reaffirmed its Union status, while trying to
   maintain slavery. During a brief invasion by Confederate forces,
   Confederate sympathizers organized a secession convention, inaugurated
   a governor, and gained recognition from the Confederacy. The rebel
   government soon went into exile and never controlled Kentucky.^[111]

   After Virginia's secession, a Unionist government in Wheeling asked 48
   counties to vote on an ordinance to create a new state on October 24,
   1861. A voter turnout of 34% approved the statehood bill (96%
   approving).^[112] The inclusion of 24 secessionist counties^[113] in
   the state and the ensuing guerrilla war engaged about 40,000 Federal
   troops for much of the war.^[114]^[115] Congress admitted West Virginia
   to the Union on June 20, 1863. West Virginia provided about
   20,000–22,000 soldiers to both the Confederacy and the Union.^[116]

   A Unionist secession attempt occurred in East Tennessee, but was
   suppressed by the Confederacy, which arrested over 3,000 men suspected
   of being loyal to the Union. They were held without trial.^[117]

Beginning the war

   For more details on this topic, see Battle of Fort Sumter.

   Lincoln's victory in the presidential election of 1860 triggered South
   Carolina's declaration of secession from the Union in December, and six
   more states did so by February 1861. A pre-war February Peace
   Conference of 1861 met in Washington, Lincoln sneaking into town to
   stay in the Conference's hotel its last three days. The attempt failed
   at resolving the crisis, but the remaining eight slave states rejected
   pleas to join the Confederacy following a two-to-one no-vote in
   Virginia's First Secessionist Convention on April 4, 1861.^[118]

Lincoln's policy

   Since December, secessionists with and without state forces had seized
   Federal Court Houses, U.S. Treasury mints and post offices. Southern
   governors ordered militia mobilization, seized most of the federal
   forts and cannon within their boundaries and U.S. armories of infantry
   weapons. The governors in big-state Republican strongholds of
   Massachusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania quietly began buying weapons
   and training militia units themselves.^[119] President Buchanan
   protested seizure of Federal property, but made no military response
   apart from a failed attempt on January 9, 1861 to resupply Fort Sumter
   using the ship Star of the West, which was fired upon by South Carolina
   forces and turned back before it reached the fort.^[118]
   Merchant steamer, Ft. Sumter center horizon, Confederate battery smoke
   left and right.
   Merchant Star of the West intended to resupply Ft. Sumter. Lincoln's
   policy to hold federal property was unlike Buchanan's

   On March 4, 1861, Abraham Lincoln was sworn in as President. In his
   inaugural address, he argued that the Constitution was a more perfect
   union than the earlier Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union,
   that it was a binding contract, and called any secession "legally
   void".^[120] He had no intent to invade Southern states, nor did he
   intend to end slavery where it existed, but said that he would use
   force to maintain possession of federal property. The government would
   make no move to recover post offices, and if resisted, mail delivery
   would end at state lines. Where popular conditions did not allow
   peaceful enforcement of Federal law, U.S. Marshals and Judges would be
   withdrawn. No mention was made of bullion lost from U.S. mints in
   Louisiana, Georgia and North Carolina. In Lincoln's Inaugural, U.S.
   policy would only collect import duties at its ports, there could be no
   serious injury to justify revolution in the politics of four years. His
   speech closed with a plea for restoration of the bonds of union.^[121]

   The South sent delegations to Washington and offered to pay for the
   federal properties and enter into a peace treaty with the United
   States. Lincoln rejected any negotiations with Confederate agents
   because he claimed the Confederacy was not a legitimate government, and
   that making any treaty with it would be tantamount to recognition of it
   as a sovereign government.^[122] Secretary of State William Seward who
   at that time saw himself as the real governor or "prime minister"
   behind the throne of the inexperienced Lincoln, engaged in unauthorized
   and indirect negotiations that failed.^[122] President Lincoln was
   determined to hold all remaining Union-occupied forts in the
   Confederacy, Fort Monroe in Virginia, in Florida, Fort Pickens, Fort
   Jefferson, and Fort Taylor, and in the cockpit of secession,
   Charleston, South Carolina's Fort Sumter.

Battle of Fort Sumter

   Main article: Battle of Fort Sumter
   Crowd surrounding an equestrian statue toped by a huge U.S. flag.
   Mass meeting April 20, 1861 to support the Government at Washington's
   equestrian statue in Union Square NYC

   Ft. Sumter was located in the middle of the harbor of Charleston, South
   Carolina, where the U.S. forts garrison had withdrawn to avoid
   incidents with local militias in the streets of the city. Unlike
   Buchanan who allowed commanders to relinquish possession to avoid
   bloodshed, Lincoln required Maj. Anderson to hold on until fired upon.
   Jefferson Davis ordered the surrender of the fort. Anderson gave a
   conditional reply that the Confederate government rejected, and Davis
   ordered P. G. T. Beauregard to attack the fort before a relief
   expedition could arrive. Troops under Beauregard bombarded Fort Sumter
   on April 12–13, forcing its capitulation. On April 15, Lincoln's
   Secretary of War then called on Governors for 75,000 volunteers to
   recapture the fort and other federal property.^[123]

   Northerners rallied behind Lincoln's call for all the states to send
   troops to recapture the forts and to preserve the Union,^[124] citing
   presidential powers given by the Militia Acts of 1792. With the scale
   of the rebellion apparently small so far, Lincoln called for 75,000
   volunteers for 90 days.^[125] Several Northern governors began to move
   forces the next day, and Secessionists seized Liberty Arsenal in
   Liberty, Missouri the next week.^[119] Two weeks later, on May 3, 1861,
   Lincoln called for an additional 42,034 volunteers for a period of
   three years.^[126]

   Four states in the middle and upper South had repeatedly rejected
   Confederate overtures, but now Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas, and North
   Carolina refused to send forces against their neighbors, declared their
   secession, and joined the Confederacy. To reward Virginia, the
   Confederate capital was moved to Richmond.^[127]

The War

   See also: List of American Civil War battles and Military leadership in
   the American Civil War

   The Civil War was a contest marked by the ferocity and frequency of
   battle. Over four years, 237 named battles were fought, and many more
   minor actions and skirmishes. In the scales of world military history,
   both sides fighting were characterized by their bitter intensity and
   high casualties. "The American Civil War was to prove one of the most
   ferocious wars ever fought". Without geographic objectives, the only
   target for each side was the enemy's soldier.^[128]

Mobilization

   As the first seven states began organizing a Confederacy in Montgomery,
   the entire US army numbered 16,000. However, Northern governors had
   begun to mobilize their militias.^[129] The Confederate Congress
   authorized the new nation up to 100,000 troops sent by governors as
   early as February. After Fort Sumter, Lincoln called out 75,000
   three-month volunteers, by May Jefferson Davis was pushing for 100,000
   men under arms for one year or the duration, and that was answered in
   kind by the U.S. Congress.^[130]

   In the first year of the war, both sides had far more volunteers than
   they could effectively train and equip. After the initial enthusiasm
   faded, reliance on the cohort of young men who came of age every year
   and wanted to join was not enough. Both sides used a draft
   law—conscription—as a device to encourage or force volunteering;
   relatively few were actually drafted and served. The Confederacy passed
   a draft law in April 1862 for young men aged 18 to 35; overseers of
   slaves, government officials, and clergymen were exempt.^[131] The U.S.
   Congress followed in July, authorizing a militia draft within a state
   when it could not meet its quota with volunteers. European immigrants
   joined the Union Army in large numbers, including 177,000 born in
   Germany and 144,000 born in Ireland.^[132]
   Union soldiers before Marye's Heights, Second Fredericksburg
   Confederate dead overrun at Marye's Heights, reoccupied next day May 4,
   1863.

   When the Emancipation Proclamation went into effect in January 1863,
   ex-slaves were energetically recruited by the states, and used to meet
   the state quotas. States and local communities offered higher and
   higher cash bonuses for white volunteers. Congress tightened the law in
   March 1863. Men selected in the draft could provide substitutes or,
   until mid-1864, pay commutation money. Many eligibles pooled their
   money to cover the cost of anyone drafted. Families used the substitute
   provision to select which man should go into the army and which should
   stay home. There was much evasion and overt resistance to the draft,
   especially in Catholic areas. The great draft riot in New York City in
   July 1863 involved Irish immigrants who had been signed up as citizens
   to swell the vote of the city's Democratic political machine, not
   realizing it made them liable for the draft.^[133] Of the 168,649 men
   procured for the Union through the draft, 117,986 were substitutes,
   leaving only 50,663 who had their personal services conscripted.^[134]

   North and South, the draft laws were highly unpopular. An estimated
   120,000 men evaded conscription in the North, many of them fleeing to
   Canada, and another 280,000 Northern soldiers deserted during the
   war,^[135]^[136] along with at least 100,000 Southerners, or about 10%
   all together.^[137] However, desertion was a common event in the 19th
   century; in the peacetime Army about 15% of the soldiers deserted every
   year.^[138] In the South, many men deserted temporarily to take care of
   their families,^[139] then returned to their units.^[140] In the North,
   "bounty jumpers" enlisted to get the generous bonus, deserted, then
   went back to a second recruiting station under a different name to sign
   up again for a second bonus; 141 were caught and executed.^[141]
   Rioters attacking a building during the New York anti-draft riots of
   1863

   From a tiny frontier force in 1860, in a few years the Union and
   Confederates armies had grown into the "largest and most efficient
   armies in the world." European observers at the time dismissed them as
   amateur and unprofessional, but British historian John Keegan's
   assessment is that each outmatched the French, Prussian and Russian
   armies of the time, and but for the Atlantic, would have threatened any
   of them with defeat.^[142]

Motivation

   Perman and Taylor (2010) say that historians are of two minds on why
   millions of men seemed so eager to fight, suffer and die over four
   years:

          "Some historians emphasize that Civil War soldiers were driven
          by political ideology, holding firm beliefs about the importance
          of liberty, Union, or state rights, or about the need to protect
          or to destroy slavery. Others point to less overtly political
          reasons to fight, such as the defense of one's home and family,
          or the honor and brotherhood to be preserved when fighting
          alongside other men. Most historians agree that no matter what a
          soldier thought about when he went into the war, the experience
          of combat affected him profoundly and sometimes altered his
          reasons for continuing the fight."^[143]

Prisoners

   Main article: American Civil War prison camps

   At the start of the civil war a system of paroles operated. Captives
   agreed not to fight until they were officially exchanged. Meanwhile
   they were held in camps run by their own army where they were paid but
   not allowed to perform any military duties.^[144] The system of
   exchanges collapsed in 1863 when the Confederacy refused to exchange
   black prisoners. After that about 56,000 of the 409,000 POWs died in
   prisons during the War, accounting for nearly 10% of the conflict's
   fatalities.^[145]

Naval war

   The small U.S. Navy of 1861 was rapidly enlarged to 6,000 officers and
   45,000 men in 1865, with 671 vessels, having a tonnage of
   510,396.^[146]^[147] Its mission was to blockade Confederate ports,
   take control of the river system, defend against Confederate raiders on
   the high seas, and be ready for a possible war with the British Royal
   Navy.^[148] Meanwhile, the main riverine war was fought in the West,
   where a series of major rivers gave access to the Confederate
   heartland, if the U.S. Navy could take control. In the East, the Navy
   supplied and moved army forces about, and occasionally shelled
   Confederate installations.

Union blockade

   Main article: Union blockade
   A cartoon map of the South surrounded by a snake.
   General Scott's "Anaconda Plan" 1861. Tightening naval blockade, rebels
   out of Missouri along Mississippi River, Kentucky Unionists sit on the
   fence, idled cotton industry illustrated in Georgia

   By early 1861, General Winfield Scott had devised the Anaconda Plan to
   win the war with as little bloodshed as possible.^[149] Scott argued
   that a Union blockade of the main ports would weaken the Confederate
   economy. Lincoln adopted parts of the plan, but he overruled Scott's
   caution about 90-day volunteers. Public opinion however demanded an
   immediate attack by the army to capture Richmond.^[150]

   In April 1861, Lincoln announced the Union blockade of all Southern
   ports; commercial ships could not get insurance and regular traffic
   ended. The South blundered in embargoing cotton exports in 1861 before
   the blockade was effective; by the time they realized the mistake it
   was too late. "King Cotton" was dead, as the South could export less
   than 10% of its cotton. The blockade shut down the ten Confederate
   seaports with railheads that moved almost all the cotton, especially
   New Orleans, Mobile, and Charleston. By June 1861, warships were
   stationed off the principal Southern ports, and a year later nearly 300
   ships were in service.^[151]

Modern navy evolves

   The Civil War prompted the industrial revolution and subsequently many
   naval innovations emerged during this time, most notably the advent of
   the ironclad warship. It began when the Confederacy, knowing they had
   to meet or match the Union's naval superiority, responded to the Union
   blockade by building or converting more than 130 vessels, including
   twenty-six ironclads and floating batteries.^[152] Only half of these
   saw active service. Many were equipped with ram bows, creating "ram
   fever" among Union squadrons wherever they threatened. But in the face
   of overwhelming Union superiority and the Union's own ironclad
   warships, they were unsuccessful.^[153]

   The Confederacy experimented with a submarine, which did not work
   well,^[154] and with building an ironclad ship, the CSS Virginia, which
   was based on rebuilding a sunken Union ship, the Merrimac. On its first
   foray on March 8, 1862, the Virginia decimated the Union's wooden
   fleet, but the next day the first Union ironclad, the USS Monitor,
   arrived to challenge it. The Battle of the Ironclads was a draw, but it
   marks the worldwide transition to ironclad warships.^[155]

   The Confederacy lost the Virginia when the ship was scuttled to prevent
   capture, and the Union built many copies of the Monitor. Lacking the
   technology to build effective warships, the Confederacy attempted to
   obtain warships from Britain.^[156]

Blockade runners

   Main article: Blockade runners of the American Civil War

   British investors built small, fast, steam-driven blockade runners that
   traded arms and luxuries brought in from Britain through Bermuda, Cuba,
   and the Bahamas in return for high-priced cotton. The ships were so
   small that only a small amount of cotton went out. When the Union Navy
   seized a blockade runner, the ship and cargo were condemned as a Prize
   of war and sold with the proceeds given to the Navy sailors; the
   captured crewmen were mostly British and they were simply
   released.^[157] The Southern economy nearly collapsed during the war.
   There were multiple reasons for this: the severe deterioration of food
   supplies, especially in cities, the failure of Southern railroads, the
   loss of control of the main rivers, foraging by Northern armies, and
   the seizure of animals and crops by Confederate armies. Historians
   agree that the blockade was a major factor in ruining the Confederate
   economy. However, Wise argues that they provided just enough of a
   lifeline to allow Lee to continue fighting for additional months,
   thanks to fresh supplies of 400,000 rifles, lead, blankets, and boots
   that the homefront economy could no longer supply.^[158]
   Gunline of nine Union ironclads. South Atlantic Blockading Squadron off
   Charleston. Continuous blockade of all major ports was sustained by
   North's overwhelming war production

Economic impact

   Surdam argues that the blockade was a powerful weapon that eventually
   ruined the Southern economy, at the cost of few lives in combat.
   Practically, the entire Confederate cotton crop was useless (although
   was sold to Union traders), costing the Confederacy its main source of
   income. Critical imports were scarce and the coastal trade was largely
   ended as well.^[159] The measure of the blockade's success was not the
   few ships that slipped through, but the thousands that never tried it.
   Merchant ships owned in Europe could not get insurance and were too
   slow to evade the blockade; they simply stopped calling at Confederate
   ports.^[160]

   To fight an offensive war the Confederacy purchased ships from Britain,
   converted them to warships, and raided American merchants ships in the
   Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Insurance rates skyrocketed and the
   American flag virtually disappeared from international waters. However,
   the same ships were reflagged with European flags and continued
   unmolested.^[153] After the war, the U.S. demanded that Britain pay for
   the damage done, and Britain paid the U.S. $15 million in 1871.^[161]

Rivers

   The 1862 Union strategy called for simultaneous advances along four
   axes. McClellan would lead the main thrust in Virginia towards
   Richmond. Ohio forces were to advance through Kentucky into Tennessee,
   the Missouri Department would drive south along the Mississippi River,
   and the westernmost attack would originate from Kansas.^[162]

    Clashes on the rivers were melees of ironclads, cottonclads gunboats
              and rams, complicated by torpedoes and fire rafts

   Ulysses Grant used river transport and Andrew Foote's gunboats of the
   Western Flotilla to threaten the Confederacy's "Gibraltar of the West"
   at Columbus, Kentucky. Grant was rebuffed at Belmont, but cut off
   Columbus. The Confederates, lacking their own gunboats, were forced to
   retreat and the Union took control of western Kentucky in March
   1862.^[163]

   In addition to ocean-going warships coming up the Mississippi, the
   Union Navy used timberclads, tinclads, and armored gunboats. Shipyards
   at Cairo, Illinois, and St. Louis built new boats or modified
   steamboats for action.^[164] They took control of the Red, Tennessee,
   Cumberland, Mississippi, and Ohio rivers after victories at Fort Henry
   and Fort Donelson, and supplied Grant's forces as he moved into
   Tennessee. At Shiloh, (Pittsburg Landing) in Tennessee in April 1862,
   the Confederates made a surprise attack that pushed Union forces
   against the river as night fell. Overnight, the Navy landed additional
   reinforcements, and Grant counter-attacked. Grant and the Union won a
   decisive victory – the first battle with the high casualty rates that
   would repeat over and over.^[165] Memphis fell to Union forces and
   became a key base for further advances south along the Mississippi
   River. In April 1862, US Naval forces under Farragut ran past
   Confederate defenses south of New Orleans. Confederates abandoned the
   city, which gave the Union a critical anchor in the deep South.^[166]

   Naval forces assisted Grant in his long, complex campaign that resulted
   in the surrender of Vicksburg in July 1863, and full Union control of
   the Mississippi soon after.^[167]

Eastern theater

   For more details on this topic, see Eastern Theater of the American
   Civil War.

   Because of the fierce resistance of a few initial Confederate forces at
   Manassas, Virginia, in July 1861, a march by Union troops under the
   command of Maj. Gen. Irvin McDowell on the Confederate forces there was
   halted in the First Battle of Bull Run, or First Manassas.^[168]
   McDowell's troops were forced back to Washington, D.C., by the
   Confederates under the command of Generals Joseph E. Johnston and P. G.
   T. Beauregard. It was in this battle that Confederate General Thomas
   Jackson received the nickname of "Stonewall" because he stood like a
   stone wall against Union troops.^[169]

   The Battle of Antietam, the Civil War's deadliest one-day fight. Union
                troops committed piecemeal had little effect

    Confederate ironclads at Norfolk and New Orleans dispersed blockade,
                   until Union ironclads could defeat them

   Alarmed at the loss, and in an attempt to prevent more slave states
   from leaving the Union, the U.S. Congress passed the Crittenden-Johnson
   Resolution on July 25 of that year, which stated that the war was being
   fought to preserve the Union and not to end slavery.

   Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan took command of the Union Army of the
   Potomac on July 26 (he was briefly general-in-chief of all the Union
   armies, but was subsequently relieved of that post in favor of Maj.
   Gen. Henry W. Halleck), and the war began in earnest in 1862. Upon the
   strong urging of President Lincoln to begin offensive operations,
   McClellan attacked Virginia in the spring of 1862 by way of the
   peninsula between the York River and James River, southeast of
   Richmond. Although McClellan's army reached the gates of Richmond in
   the Peninsula Campaign,^[170]^[171]^[172] Johnston halted his advance
   at the Battle of Seven Pines, then General Robert E. Lee and top
   subordinates James Longstreet and Stonewall Jackson defeated McClellan
   in the Seven Days Battles and forced his retreat.^[173] The Northern
   Virginia Campaign, which included the Second Battle of Bull Run, ended
   in yet another victory for the South.^[174] McClellan resisted
   General-in-Chief Halleck's orders to send reinforcements to John Pope's
   Union Army of Virginia, which made it easier for Lee's Confederates to
   defeat twice the number of combined enemy troops.

   Emboldened by Second Bull Run, the Confederacy made its first invasion
   of the North. General Lee led 45,000 men of the Army of Northern
   Virginia across the Potomac River into Maryland on September 5. Lincoln
   then restored Pope's troops to McClellan. McClellan and Lee fought at
   the Battle of Antietam near Sharpsburg, Maryland, on September 17,
   1862, the bloodiest single day in United States military
   history.^[173]^[175] Lee's army, checked at last, returned to Virginia
   before McClellan could destroy it. Antietam is considered a Union
   victory because it halted Lee's invasion of the North and provided an
   opportunity for Lincoln to announce his Emancipation
   Proclamation.^[176]

   When the cautious McClellan failed to follow up on Antietam, he was
   replaced by Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside. Burnside was soon defeated at
   the Battle of Fredericksburg^[177] on December 13, 1862, when over
   12,000 Union soldiers were killed or wounded during repeated futile
   frontal assaults against Marye's Heights. After the battle, Burnside
   was replaced by Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker.

   Hooker, too, proved unable to defeat Lee's army; despite outnumbering
   the Confederates by more than two to one, he was humiliated in the
   Battle of Chancellorsville in May 1863.^[178] Gen. Stonewall Jackson
   was mortally wounded by his own men during the battle and subsequently
   died of complications. Gen. Hooker was replaced by Maj. Gen. George
   Meade during Lee's second invasion of the North, in June. Meade
   defeated Lee at the Battle of Gettysburg (July 1 to 3, 1863).^[179]
   This was the bloodiest battle of the war, and has been called the war's
   turning point. Pickett's Charge on July 3 is often considered the
   high-water mark of the Confederacy because it signaled the collapse of
   serious Confederate threats of victory. Lee's army suffered 28,000
   casualties (versus Meade's 23,000).^[180] However, Lincoln was angry
   that Meade failed to intercept Lee's retreat, and after Meade's
   inconclusive fall campaign, Lincoln turned to the Western Theater for
   new leadership. At the same time, the Confederate stronghold of
   Vicksburg surrendered, giving the Union control of the Mississippi
   River, permanently isolating the western Confederacy, and producing the
   new leader Lincoln needed, Ulysses S. Grant.

Western theater

   For more details on this topic, see Western Theater of the American
   Civil War.

   While the Confederate forces had numerous successes in the Eastern
   Theater, they were defeated many times in the West. They were driven
   from Missouri early in the war as a result of the Battle of Pea
   Ridge.^[181] Leonidas Polk's invasion of Columbus, Kentucky ended
   Kentucky's policy of neutrality and turned that state against the
   Confederacy. Nashville and central Tennessee fell to the Union early in
   1862, leading to attrition of local food supplies and livestock and a
   breakdown in social organization.

     The Battle of Chickamauga, the highest two-day losses. Confederate
              victory held off Union offensive for two months.

   New Orleans captured. Union ironclads forced passage, sank Confederate
              fleet, destroyed batteries, held docks for Army.

   The Mississippi was opened to Union traffic to the southern border of
   Tennessee with the taking of Island No. 10 and New Madrid, Missouri,
   and then Memphis, Tennessee. In April 1862, the Union Navy captured New
   Orleans,^[182] which allowed Union forces to begin moving up the
   Mississippi. Only the fortress city of Vicksburg, Mississippi,
   prevented Union control of the entire river.

   General Braxton Bragg's second Confederate invasion of Kentucky ended
   with a meaningless victory over Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell at the
   Battle of Perryville, although Bragg was forced to end his attempt at
   invading Kentucky and retreat due to lack of support for the
   Confederacy in that state.^[183] Bragg was narrowly defeated by Maj.
   Gen. William Rosecrans at the Battle of Stones River in
   Tennessee.^[184]

   The one clear Confederate victory in the West was the Battle of
   Chickamauga. Bragg, reinforced by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet's corps
   (from Lee's army in the east), defeated Rosecrans, despite the heroic
   defensive stand of Maj. Gen. George Henry Thomas. Rosecrans retreated
   to Chattanooga, which Bragg then besieged.

   The Union's key strategist and tactician in the West was Ulysses S.
   Grant, who won victories at Forts Henry and Donelson (by which the
   Union seized control of the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers); the
   Battle of Shiloh;^[185] and the Battle of Vicksburg,^[186] which
   cemented Union control of the Mississippi River and is considered one
   of the turning points of the war. Grant marched to the relief of
   Rosecrans and defeated Bragg at the Third Battle of Chattanooga,^[187]
   driving Confederate forces out of Tennessee and opening a route to
   Atlanta and the heart of the Confederacy.

Trans-Mississippi

   For more details on Missouri in the Civil War, see Trans-Mississippi
   Theater of the American Civil War.

    Quantrill's Raid captured a hotel in free-state Kansas for a day in a
     town of 2,000, burned 185 buildings, killed 182 men and boys^[189]

   Nathaniel Lyon secured St. Louis docks and arsenal, led Union forces to
           expel Missouri Confederate forces and government^[188]

   Extensive guerrilla warfare characterized the trans-Mississippi region,
   as the Confederacy lacked the troops and the logistics to support
   regular armies that could challenge Union control.^[190] Roving
   Confederate bands such as Quantrill's Raiders terrorized the
   countryside, striking both military installations and civilian
   settlements.^[191] The "Sons of Liberty" and "Order of the American
   Knights" attacked pro-Union people, elected officeholders, and unarmed
   uniformed soldiers. These partisans could not be entirely driven out of
   the state of Missouri until an entire regular Union infantry division
   was engaged.

   By 1864, these violent activities harmed the nationwide anti-war
   movement organizing against the re-election of Lincoln. Missouri not
   only stayed in the Union, Lincoln took 70 percent of the vote for
   re-election.^[189]

   Numerous small-scale military actions south and west of Missouri sought
   to control Indian Territory and New Mexico Territory for the Union. The
   Union repulsed Confederate incursions into New Mexico in 1862, and the
   exiled Arizona government withdrew into Texas. In the Indian Territory,
   civil war broke out inside the tribes. About 12,000 Indian warriors
   fought for the Confederacy, and smaller numbers for the Union.^[192]
   The most prominent Cherokee was Brigadier General Stand Watie, the last
   Confederate general to surrender.^[193]

   After the fall of Vicksburg in July 1863, General Kirby Smith in Texas
   was informed by Jefferson Davis that he could expect no further help
   from east of the Mississippi River. Although he lacked resources to
   beat Union armies, he built up a formidable arsenal at Tyler, along
   with his own Kirby Smithdom economy, a virtual "independent fiefdom" in
   Texas, including railroad construction and international smuggling. The
   Union in turn did not directly engage him.^[194] Its 1864 Red River
   Campaign to take Shreveport, Louisiana was a failure and Texas remained
   in Confederate hands throughout the war.

End of war

Conquest of Virginia

   At the beginning of 1864, Lincoln made Grant commander of all Union
   armies. Grant made his headquarters with the Army of the Potomac, and
   put Maj. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman in command of most of the
   western armies. Grant understood the concept of total war and believed,
   along with Lincoln and Sherman, that only the utter defeat of
   Confederate forces and their economic base would end the war.^[195]
   This was total war not in killing civilians but rather in destroying
   homes, farms, and railroads. Grant devised a coordinated strategy that
   would strike at the entire Confederacy from multiple directions.
   Generals George Meade and Benjamin Butler were ordered to move against
   Lee near Richmond, General Franz Sigel (and later Philip Sheridan) were
   to attack the Shenandoah Valley, General Sherman was to capture Atlanta
   and march to the sea (the Atlantic Ocean), Generals George Crook and
   William W. Averell were to operate against railroad supply lines in
   West Virginia, and Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks was to capture Mobile,
   Alabama.

    These dead are from Ewell's May 1864 attack at Spotsylvania, delaying
                Grant's advance on Richmond in the Wilderness

       The Peacemakers on the River Queen, March 1865. Sherman, Grant,
   Lincoln, and Porter pictured discussing plans for the last weeks of the
                                  Civil War

   Grant's army set out on the Overland Campaign with the goal of drawing
   Lee into a defense of Richmond, where they would attempt to pin down
   and destroy the Confederate army. The Union army first attempted to
   maneuver past Lee and fought several battles, notably at the
   Wilderness, Spotsylvania, and Cold Harbor. These battles resulted in
   heavy losses on both sides, and forced Lee's Confederates to fall back
   repeatedly.^[196] An attempt to outflank Lee from the south failed
   under Butler, who was trapped inside the Bermuda Hundred river bend.
   Each battle resulted in setbacks for the Union that mirrored what they
   had suffered under prior generals, though unlike those prior generals,
   Grant fought on rather than retreat. Grant was tenacious and kept
   pressing Lee's Army of Northern Virginia back to Richmond.^[197] While
   Lee was preparing for an attack on Richmond, Grant unexpectedly turned
   south to cross the James River and began the protracted Siege of
   Petersburg, where the two armies engaged in trench warfare for over
   nine months.

   Grant finally found a commander, General Philip Sheridan, aggressive
   enough to prevail in the Valley Campaigns of 1864. Sheridan was
   initially repelled at the Battle of New Market by former U.S. Vice
   President and Confederate Gen. John C. Breckinridge. The Battle of New
   Market was the Confederacy's last major victory of the war. After
   redoubling his efforts, Sheridan defeated Maj. Gen. Jubal A. Early in a
   series of battles, including a final decisive defeat at the Battle of
   Cedar Creek. Sheridan then proceeded to destroy the agricultural base
   of the Shenandoah Valley, a strategy similar to the tactics Sherman
   later employed in Georgia.^[198]

   Meanwhile, Sherman maneuvered from Chattanooga to Atlanta, defeating
   Confederate Generals Joseph E. Johnston and John Bell Hood along the
   way. The fall of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, guaranteed the
   reelection of Lincoln as president.^[199] Hood left the Atlanta area to
   swing around and menace Sherman's supply lines and invade Tennessee in
   the Franklin-Nashville Campaign.^[200] Union Maj. Gen. John Schofield
   defeated Hood at the Battle of Franklin, and George H. Thomas dealt
   Hood a massive defeat at the Battle of Nashville, effectively
   destroying Hood's army.

   Leaving Atlanta, and his base of supplies, Sherman's army marched with
   an unknown destination, laying waste to about 20% of the farms in
   Georgia in his "March to the Sea". He reached the Atlantic Ocean at
   Savannah, Georgia in December 1864. Sherman's army was followed by
   thousands of freed slaves; there were no major battles along the March.
   Sherman turned north through South Carolina and North Carolina to
   approach the Confederate Virginia lines from the south, increasing the
   pressure on Lee's army.^[201]

   Lee's army, thinned by desertion and casualties, was now much smaller
   than Grant's. One last Confederate attempt to break the Union hold on
   Petersburg failed at the decisive Battle of Five Forks (sometimes
   called "the Waterloo of the Confederacy") on April 1. This meant that
   the Union now controlled the entire parameter surrounding
   Richmond-Petersburg, completely cutting it off from the Confederacy.
   Realizing that the capital was now lost, Lee decided to evacuate his
   army. The Confederate capital fell to the Union XXV Corps, composed of
   black troops. The remaining Confederate units fled west and after a
   defeat at Sayler's Creek.^[202]

Confederacy surrenders

   A map of the U.S. South showing shrinking territory under rebel
   control.
   Map of Confederate territory losses year by year
   Main article: Conclusion of the American Civil War

   Initially, Lee was not intending to surrender, but rather to regroup at
   the village of Appomattox Court House, where supplies were to be
   waiting, and to continue the war. Grant chased Lee, and got in front of
   him, so that when Lee's army reached Appomattox Court House, they were
   surrounded. After an initial battle, Lee decided that the fight was now
   hopeless, and so he surrendered his Army of Northern Virginia on April
   9, 1865, at the McLean House.^[203] In an untraditional gesture and as
   a sign of Grant's respect and anticipation of peacefully restoring
   Confederate states to the Union, Lee was permitted to keep his sword
   and his horse, Traveller. On April 14, 1865, President Lincoln was shot
   by John Wilkes Booth, a Southern sympathizer. Lincoln died early the
   next morning, and Andrew Johnson became the president. Meanwhile,
   Confederate forces across the South surrendered as news of Lee's
   surrender reached them.^[204] President Johnson officially declared a
   virtual end to the insurrection on May 9, 1865, Confederate President
   Jefferson Davis was captured the following day.^[1] On June 23, 1865,
   Cherokee leader Stand Watie was the last Confederate General to
   surrender his forces.^[205]

Diplomacy

   Main articles: Britain in the American Civil War and France in the
   American Civil War

   Europe in the 1860s was more fragmented than it had been since before
   the American Revolution. France was in a weakened state while Britain
   was still shocked by its own poor performance in the Crimean War.^[206]
   France was unable or unwilling to support either side without Britain,
   where popular support remained with the Union though elite opinion was
   more varied. They were further distracted by Germany and Italy, who
   were experiencing unification troubles, and by Russia, who was almost
   unflinching in their support for the Union.^[206]^[207]

   Though the Confederacy hoped that Britain and France would join them
   against the Union, this was never likely, and so they instead tried to
   bring Britain and France in as mediators.^[206]^[207] The Union, under
   Lincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward worked to block this,
   and threatened war if any country officially recognized the existence
   of the Confederate States of America. In 1861, Southerners voluntarily
   embargoed cotton shipments, hoping to start an economic depression in
   Europe that would force Britain to enter the war to get cotton, but
   this did not work.^[208] Worse, Europe developed other cotton
   suppliers, which they found superior, hindering the South's recovery
   after the war.
   A group of twenty-six sailors posing around a rifled naval cannon.
   Crewmembers of USS Wissahickon by the ship's 11-inch (280 mm) Dahlgren
   gun, circa 1863

   Cotton diplomacy proved a failure as Europe had a surplus of cotton,
   while the 1860–62 crop failures in Europe made the North's grain
   exports of critical importance. It also helped to turn European opinion
   further away from the Confederacy. It was said that "King Corn was more
   powerful than King Cotton", as U.S. grain went from a quarter of the
   British import trade to almost half.^[208] When Britain did face a
   cotton shortage, it was temporary, being replaced by increased
   cultivation in Egypt and India. Meanwhile, the war created employment
   for arms makers, ironworkers, and British ships to transport
   weapons.^[209]

   Charles Francis Adams proved particularly adept as minister to Britain
   for the U.S. and Britain was reluctant to boldly challenge the
   blockade. The Confederacy purchased several warships from commercial
   ship builders in Britain (CSS Alabama, CSS Shenandoah, CSS Tennessee,
   CSS Tallahassee, CSS Florida and some others). The most famous, the CSS
   Alabama, did considerable damage and led to serious postwar disputes.
   However, public opinion against slavery created a political liability
   for European politicians, especially in Britain (which had abolished
   slavery in her colonies in 1834).^[210]

   War loomed in late 1861 between the U.S. and Britain over the Trent
   Affair, involving the U.S. Navy's boarding of a British mail steamer to
   seize two Confederate diplomats. However, London and Washington were
   able to smooth over the problem after Lincoln released the two. In
   1862, the British considered mediation—though even such an offer would
   have risked war with the U.S. Lord Palmerston reportedly read Uncle
   Tom's Cabin three times when deciding on this.^[210]

   The Union victory in the Battle of Antietam caused them to delay this
   decision. The Emancipation Proclamation over time would reinforce the
   political liability of supporting the Confederacy. Despite sympathy for
   the Confederacy, France's own seizure of Mexico ultimately deterred
   them from war with the Union. Confederate offers late in the war to end
   slavery in return for diplomatic recognition were not seriously
   considered by London or Paris. After 1863, the Polish revolt against
   Russia further distracted the European powers, and ensured that they
   would remain neutral.^[211]

Victory and aftermath

Results

   The causes of the war, the reasons for its outcome, and even the name
   of the war itself are subjects of lingering contention today. The North
   and West grew rich while the once-rich South became poor for a century.
   The national political power of the slaveowners and rich southerners
   ended. Historians are less sure about the results of the postwar
   Reconstruction, especially regarding the second class citizenship of
   the Freedmen and their poverty. The Freedmen did indeed get their
   freedom, their citizenship, and control of their lives, their families
   and their churches.

   Historians have debated whether the Confederacy could have won the war.
   Most scholars, such as James McPherson, argue that Confederate victory
   was at least possible.^[212] McPherson argues that the North's
   advantage in population and resources made Northern victory likely but
   not guaranteed. He also argues that if the Confederacy had fought using
   unconventional tactics, they would have more easily been able to hold
   out long enough to exhaust the Union.^[213]

   CAPTION: Comparison of Union and CSA, 1860–1864^[214]

                    Year           Union                   CSA
   Population      1860    22,100,000 (71%)       9,100,000 (29%)
                   1864    28,800,000 (90%)^[N 6] 3,000,000 (10%)^[215]
   Free            1860    21,700,000 (81%)       5,600,000 (19%)
   Slave           1860    400,000 (11%)          3,500,000 (89%)
                   1864    negligible             1,900,000^[N 7]
   Soldiers        1860–64 2,100,000 (67%)        1,064,000 (33%)
   Railroad miles  1860    21,800 (71%)           8,800 (29%)
                   1864    29,100 (98%)^[216]     negligible
   Manufactures    1860    90%                    10%
                   1864    98%                    negligible
   Arms production 1860    97%                    3%
                   1864    98%                    negligible
   Cotton bales    1860    negligible             4,500,000
                   1864    300,000                negligible
   Exports         1860    30%                    70%
                   1864    98%                    negligible

   Confederates did not need to invade and hold enemy territory to win,
   but only needed to fight a defensive war to convince the North that the
   cost of winning was too high. The North needed to conquer and hold vast
   stretches of enemy territory and defeat Confederate armies to
   win.^[213] Lincoln was not a military dictator, and could only continue
   to fight the war as long as the American public supported a
   continuation of the war. The Confederacy sought to win independence by
   out-lasting Lincoln; however, after Atlanta fell and Lincoln defeated
   McClellan in the election of 1864, all hope for a political victory for
   the South ended. At that point, Lincoln had secured the support of the
   Republicans, War Democrats, the border states, emancipated slaves, and
   the neutrality of Britain and France. By defeating the Democrats and
   McClellan, he also defeated the Copperheads and their peace
   platform.^[217]

   Many scholars argue that the Union held an insurmountable long-term
   advantage over the Confederacy in industrial strength and population.
   Confederate actions, they argue, only delayed defeat.^[218]^[219] Civil
   War historian Shelby Foote expressed this view succinctly: "I think
   that the North fought that war with one hand behind its back ... If
   there had been more Southern victories, and a lot more, the North
   simply would have brought that other hand out from behind its back. I
   don't think the South ever had a chance to win that War."^[220]

   A minority view among historians is that the Confederacy lost because,
   as E. Merton Coulter put it,"people did not will hard enough and long
   enough to win."^[221]^[222] The black Marxist historian Armstead
   Robinson agrees, pointing to a class conflict in the Confederates army
   between the slave owners and the larger number of non-owners. He argues
   that the non-owner soldiers grew embittered about fighting to preserve
   slavery, and fought less enthusiastically. He attributes the major
   Confederate defeats in 1863 at Vicksburg and Missionary Ridge to this
   class conflict.^[223] However, most historians reject the
   argument.^[224] James M. McPherson, after reading thousands of letters
   written by Confederate soldiers, found strong patriotism that continued
   to the end; they truly believed they were fighting for freedom and
   liberty. Even as the Confederacy was visibly collapsing in 1864-5, he
   says most Confederate soldiers were fighting hard.^[225] Historian Gary
   Gallagher cites General Sherman who in early 1864 commented, "The
   devils seem to have a determination that cannot but be admired."
   Despite their loss of slaves and wealth, with starvation looming,
   Sherman continued, "yet I see no sign of let up – some few deserters –
   plenty tired of war, but the masses determined to fight it out."^[226]

   Also important were Lincoln's eloquence in rationalizing the national
   purpose and his skill in keeping the border states committed to the
   Union cause. Although Lincoln's approach to emancipation was slow, the
   Emancipation Proclamation was an effective use of the President's war
   powers.^[227] The Confederate government failed in its attempt to get
   Europe involved in the war militarily, particularly Britain and France.
   Southern leaders needed to get European powers to help break up the
   blockade the Union had created around the Southern ports and cities.

   Lincoln's naval blockade was 95% effective at stopping trade goods; as
   a result, imports and exports to the South declined significantly. The
   abundance of European cotton and Britain's hostility to the institution
   of slavery, along with Lincoln's Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico naval
   blockades, severely decreased any chance that either Britain or France
   would enter the war.

Costs

   The war produced about 1,030,000 casualties (3% of the population),
   including about 620,000 soldier deaths—two-thirds by disease, and
   50,000 civilians.^[228] Binghamton University historian J. David Hacker
   believes the number of soldier deaths was approximately 750,000, 20%
   higher than traditionally estimated, and possibly as high as
   850,000.^[229]^[230] The war accounted for roughly as many American
   deaths as all American deaths in other U.S. wars combined.^[231]

                   One in thirteen veterans were amputees

                    Remains of both sides were reinterred

                    National cemetery in Andersonville GA

   Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died
   in the war, including 6% in the North and 18% in the South.^[232]^[233]
   About 56,000 soldiers died in prison camps during the War.^[234] An
   estimated 60,000 men lost limbs in the war.^[235]

   Confederate death toll estimates vary considerably. Union army dead,
   amounting to 15% of the over two million who served, was broken down as
   follows:^[2]
     * 110,070 killed in action (67,000) or dead of wounds (43,000).
     * 199,790 dead of disease (75% of which was due to the war, the
       remainder would have occurred in civilian life anyway)
     * 24,866 dead in Confederate prison camps
     * 9,058 killed by accidents or drowning
     * 15,741 other/unknown deaths
     * 359,528 total dead

   Black troops accounted for 10% of the Union death toll, they amounted
   to 15% of disease deaths but less than 3% of those killed in
   battle.^[2]

   Losses can be viewed as high considering that the defeat of Mexico in
   1846–48 resulted in fewer than 2,000 soldiers killed in battle. One
   reason for the high number of battle deaths during the war was the use
   of Napoleonic tactics, such as charging. With the advent of more
   accurate rifled barrels, Minié balls and (near the end of the war for
   the Union army) repeating firearms such as the Spencer Repeating Rifle
   and the Henry Repeating Rifle, soldiers were mowed down when standing
   in lines in the open. This led to the adoption of trench warfare, a
   style of fighting that defined the better part of World War I.

   The wealth amassed in slaves and slavery for the Confederacy's 3.5
   million blacks effectively ended when Union armies arrived; they were
   nearly all freed by the Emancipation Proclamation. Slaves in the border
   states and those located in some former Confederate territory occupied
   before the Emancipation Proclamation were freed by state action or (on
   December 18, 1865) by the Thirteenth Amendment.

   The war destroyed much of the wealth that had existed in the South. All
   accumulated investment Confederate bonds was forfeit; most banks and
   railroads were bankrupt. Income per person in the South dropped to less
   than 40% of that of the North, a condition that lasted until well into
   the 20th century. Southern influence in the US federal government,
   previously considerable, was greatly diminished until the latter half
   of the 20th century.^[236] The full restoration of the Union was the
   work of a highly contentious postwar era known as Reconstruction.

Emancipation

Issue of Slavery During the War

   While not all Southerners saw themselves as fighting to preserve
   slavery, most of the officers and over a third of the rank and file in
   Lee's army had close family ties to slavery. To Northerners, in
   contrast, the motivation was primarily to preserve the Union, not to
   abolish slavery.^[237] Abraham Lincoln consistently made preserving the
   Union the central goal of the war, though he increasingly saw slavery
   as a crucial issue and made ending it an additional goal.^[238]
   Lincoln's decision to issue the Emancipation Proclamation angered both
   Peace Democrats ("Copperheads") and War Democrats, but energized most
   Republicans.^[239] By warning that free blacks would flood the North,
   Democrats made gains in the 1862 elections, but they did not gain
   control of Congress. The Republicans' counterargument that slavery was
   the mainstay of the enemy steadily gained support, with the Democrats
   losing decisively in the 1863 elections in the northern state of Ohio
   when they tried to resurrect anti-black sentiment.^[240]

Emancipation Proclamation

   Main article: Emancipation Proclamation

   The Emancipation Proclamation enabled African-Americans, both free
   blacks and escaped slaves, to join the Union Army.^[N 8] About 190,000
   volunteered, further enhancing the numerical advantage the Union armies
   enjoyed over the Confederates, who did not dare emulate the equivalent
   manpower source for fear of fundamentally undermining the legitimacy of
   slavery.^[N 9]

   During the Civil War, sentiment concerning slaves, enslavement and
   emancipation in the United States was divided. In 1861, Lincoln worried
   that premature attempts at emancipation would mean the loss of the
   border states, and that "to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose
   the whole game."^[246] Copperheads and some War Democrats opposed
   emancipation, although the latter eventually accepted it as part of
   total war needed to save the Union.^[247]

      Contrabands — fugitive slaves — cooks, laundresses, laborers,
  teamsters, railroad repair crews — fled to the Union Army, but were not
            officially freed until 1863 Emancipation Proclamation

     In 1863, the Union army accepted Freedmen. Here are Black and White
                             teen-aged soldiers.

   At first, Lincoln reversed attempts at emancipation by Secretary of War
   Simon Cameron and Generals John C. Frémont (in Missouri) and David
   Hunter (in South Carolina, Georgia and Florida) to keep the loyalty of
   the border states and the War Democrats. Lincoln warned the border
   states that a more radical type of emancipation would happen if his
   gradual plan based on compensated emancipation and voluntary
   colonization was rejected.^[248] But only the District of Columbia
   accepted Lincoln's gradual plan, which was enacted by Congress. When
   Lincoln told his cabinet about his proposed emancipation proclamation,
   Seward advised Lincoln to wait for a victory before issuing it, as to
   do otherwise would seem like "our last shriek on the retreat".^[249]
   Lincoln laid the groundwork for public support in an open letter
   published letter to abolitionist Horace Greeley's newspaper.^[250]

   In September 1862, the Battle of Antietam provided this opportunity,
   and the subsequent War Governors' Conference added support for the
   proclamation.^[251] Lincoln issued his preliminary Emancipation
   Proclamation on September 22, 1862, and his final Emancipation
   Proclamation on January 1, 1863. In his letter to Albert G. Hodges,
   Lincoln explained his belief that "If slavery is not wrong, nothing is
   wrong ... And yet I have never understood that the Presidency conferred
   upon me an unrestricted right to act officially upon this judgment and
   feeling ... I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly
   that events have controlled me."^[252]

   Lincoln's moderate approach succeeded in inducing border states, War
   Democrats and emancipated slaves to fight for the Union. The
   Union-controlled border states (Kentucky, Missouri, Maryland, Delaware
   and West Virginia) and Union controlled regions around New Orleans,
   Norfolk and elsewhere, were not covered by the Emancipation
   Proclamation. All abolished slavery on their own, except Kentucky and
   Delaware.^[253]

   Since the Emancipation Proclamation was based on the President's war
   powers, it only included territory held by Confederates at the time.
   However, the Proclamation became a symbol of the Union's growing
   commitment to add emancipation to the Union's definition of
   liberty.^[254] The Emancipation Proclamation greatly reduced the
   Confederacy's hope of getting aid from Britain or France.^[255] By late
   1864, Lincoln was playing a leading role in getting Congress to vote
   for the Thirteenth Amendment, which made emancipation universal and
   permanent.^[256]

Texas v. White

   In Texas v. White, 74 U.S. 700 (1869) the United States Supreme Court
   ruled that Texas had remained a state ever since it first joined the
   Union, despite claims that it joined the Confederate States of America;
   the court further held that the Constitution did not permit states to
   unilaterally secede from the United States, and that the ordinances of
   secession, and all the acts of the legislatures within seceding states
   intended to give effect to such ordinances, were "absolutely null",
   under the constitution.^[257]

Reconstruction

   Main article: Reconstruction Era of the United States
   Northern teachers traveled into the South to provide education and
   training for the newly freed population.

   Reconstruction began during the war, with the Emancipation Proclamation
   of January 1, 1863 and continued to 1877.^[258] It comprised multiple
   complex methods to resolve the war, the most important of which were
   the three "Reconstruction Amendments" to the Constitution, which remain
   in effect to the present time: the 13th (1865), the 14th (1868) and the
   15th (1870). From the Union perspective, the goals of Reconstruction
   were to guarantee the Union victory on the battlefield by reuniting the
   Union; to guarantee a "republican form of government for the
   ex-Confederate states; and to permanently end slavery—and prevent
   semi-slavery status.^[259]

   President Johnson took a lenient approach and saw the achievement of
   the main war goals as realized in 1865, when each ex-rebel state
   repudiated secession and ratified the Thirteenth Amendment. Radical
   Republicans demanded strong proof that Confederate nationalism was dead
   and the slaves were truly free. They came to the fore after the 1866
   elections and undid much of Johnson's work. They used the Army to
   dissolve Southern state governments and hold new elections with
   Freedmen voting. The result was a Republican coalition that took power
   in ten states for varying lengths of time, staying in power with the
   help of U.S. Army units and black voters. Grant was elected president
   in 1868 and continued the Radical policies. Meanwhile the Freedmen's
   Bureau, started by Lincoln in 1865 to help the freed slaves, played a
   major role in helping the blacks and arranging work for them. In
   opposition paramilitary groups such as the first Ku Klux Klan used
   violence to thwart these efforts.^[260]

   The "Liberal Republicans" argued the war goals had been achieved and
   Reconstruction should end. They ran a ticket in 1872 but were
   decisively defeated as Grant was reelected. In 1874, Democrats took
   control of Congress and opposed any more reconstruction. The disputed
   1876 elections were resolved by the Compromise of 1877, which put
   Republican Rutherford B. Hayes in the White House. He pulled out the
   last federal troops and the last Republican state governments in the
   South collapsed, marking the end of Civil War and Reconstruction.^[261]

Memory and historiography

         Monument to the Grand Army of the Republic, a Union veteran
                                organization

   Cherokee Confederates reunion in New Orleans, 1903

   The Civil War is one of the central events in America's collective
   memory. There are innumerable statues, commemorations, books and
   archival collections. The memory includes the home front, military
   affairs, the treatment of soldiers, both living and dead, in the war's
   aftermath, depictions of the war in literature and art, evaluations of
   heroes and villains, and considerations of the moral and political
   lessons of the war.^[262] The last theme includes moral evaluations of
   racism and slavery, heroism in combat and behind the lines, and the
   issues of democracy and minority rights, as well as the notion of an
   "Empire of Liberty" influencing the world.^[263]

   Deeply religious Southerners saw the hand of God in history, which
   demonstrated His wrath at their sinfulness, or His rewards for their
   suffering. Historian Wilson Fallin has examined the sermons of white
   and black Baptist preachers after the War. Southern white preachers
   said:

          God had chastised them and given them a special mission – to
          maintain orthodoxy, strict biblicism, personal piety, and
          traditional race relations. Slavery, they insisted, had not been
          sinful. Rather, emancipation was a historical tragedy and the
          end of Reconstruction was a clear sign of God's favor.

   In sharp contrast, Black preachers interpreted the Civil War as:

          God's gift of freedom. They appreciated opportunities to
          exercise their independence, to worship in their own way, to
          affirm their worth and dignity, and to proclaim the fatherhood
          of God and the brotherhood of man. Most of all, they could form
          their own churches, associations, and conventions. These
          institutions offered self-help and racial uplift, and provided
          places where the gospel of liberation could be proclaimed. As a
          result, black preachers continued to insist that God would
          protect and help him; God would be their rock in a stormy
          land.^[264]

Lost Cause

   Memory of the war in the white South crystallized in the myth of the
   "Lost Cause", which shaped regional identity and race relations for
   generations.^[265] Alan T. Nolan notes that the Lost Cause was
   expressly "a rationalization, a cover-up to vindicate the name and
   fame" of those in rebellion. Some claims revolve around the
   insignificance of slavery. Some appeals highlight cultural differences
   North and South. The military conflict by Confederate actors is
   idealized. In any case, secession was said to be lawful.^[266] The two
   important political legacies flowed from the adoption of the Lost Cause
   analysis were that it facilitated the reunification of the North and
   the South, and it excused the “virulent racism” of the 19th century,
   sacrificing African-American progress to a white man’s reunification.
   But the Lost Cause legacy to history is “a caricature of the truth.
   This caricature wholly misrepresents and distorts the facts of the
   matter” in every instance.^[267]
   Beginning in 1961 the U.S. Post Office released Commemorative stamps
   for five famous battles, each issued on the 100th anniversary of the
   respective battle.

Beardian historiography

   The most influential interpretation of the Civil War was the Beardian
   approach presented by Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard in The Rise of
   American Civilization (1927). It was highly influential among
   historians and the general public until the civil rights era of the
   1950s. The Beards downplayed slavery, abolitionism, and issues of
   morality. They ignored constitutional issues of states' rights and even
   ignored American nationalism as the force that finally led to victory
   in the war. Indeed the ferocious combat itself was passed over as
   merely an ephemeral event. Much more important was the calculus of
   class conflict. The Beards announced that the Civil War was really a:

          Social cataclysm in which the capitalists, laborers, and farmers
          of the North and West drove from power in the national
          government the planting aristocracy of the South."^[268]

   The Beards themselves abandoned their interpretation by the 1940s and
   it became defunct among historians in the 1950s, when scholars shifted
   to an emphasis on slavery. However, Beardian themes still echo among
   Lost Cause writers.^[269]

Civil War commemoration

   Main article: Commemoration of the American Civil War
   See also: Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps

   ^[270] The American Civil War has been commemorated in many capacities
   ranging from the reenactment of battles, to statues and memorial halls
   erected, to films being produced, to stamps and coins with Civil War
   themes being issued, all of which helped to shape public memory. This
   varied advent occurred in greater proportions on the 100th and 150th
   anniversary. ^[270] Hollywood's take on the war has been especially
   influential in shaping public memory, as seen in such film classics as
   Birth of a Nation (1915), Gone with the Wind (1939), and Lincoln
   (2012).

See also

   Portal icon American Civil War portal

   General reference
     * Battles of the American Civil War
     * Bibliography of the American Civil War
     * Corps badges of the American Civil War
     * Naval bibliography of the American Civil War
     * Uniforms of the Union
     * Uniforms of the Confederacy
     * Weapons in the American Civil War

   Union
     * United States
     * Union Army
     * Union Navy

   Confederacy
     * Confederate States
     * Confederate Army
     * Confederate Navy

   Ethnic articles
     * African Americans in the American Civil War
     * German Americans in the American Civil War
     * Hispanic Americans in the American Civil War
     * Irish Americans in the American Civil War
     * Italian Americans in the American Civil War
     * Native Americans in the American Civil War

   Topical articles
     * Blockade runners of the American Civil War
     * Blockade, Union – of the American Civil War
     * Casualties in the American Civil War
     * Commemoration of the American Civil War
     * Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps
     * Nursing in the American Civil War, Dorothea Dix
     * Ships captured during the American Civil War
     * Slaves and the American Civil War
     * Spies in the American Civil War

   National articles
     * Foreign enlistment in the American Civil War
     * Britain in the American Civil War
     * Canada in the American Civil War

References

   Notes

    1. ^ Territories are organized areas that could potentially become
       states.
    2. ^ A novel way of calculating casualties by looking at the deviation
       of the death rate of men of fighting age from the norm through
       analysis of census data found that at least 627,000 and at most
       888,000 people, but most likely 761,000 people, died through the
       war.^[8]
    3. ^ As sectional divisions hardened, support for breaking up the
       Democratic party and secession on the issue of slavery in the
       territories was strongly correlated to the number of plantations in
       each region. Lipset looked at the secessionist vote in each
       Southern state in 1860–61. In each state he divided the counties
       into high, medium or low proportion of slaves. He found that in the
       181 high-slavery counties, the vote was 72% for secession. In the
       205 low-slavery counties, the vote was only 37% for secession. (And
       in the 153 middle counties, the vote for secession was in the
       middle at 60%.) States of the Deep South, which had the greatest
       concentration of plantations, were the first to secede. The upper
       South slave states of Virginia, North Carolina, Arkansas and
       Tennessee had fewer plantations, and rejected secession until the
       Fort Sumter crisis forced them to choose sides. Border states had
       fewer plantations still and never seceded.^[26]^[27]^[28] Maps on
       p. 101 (The Southern Economy) and p. 236 (The Progress of
       Secession) are also relevant.^[29]
    4. ^ Abraham Lincoln, Speech at New Haven, Conn., March 6, 1860. The
       slavery issue was related to sectional competition for control of
       the territories.^[37] The Southern demand for a slave code for the
       territories was the issue used by Southern politicians to split the
       Democratic Party in two, which all but guaranteed the election of
       Lincoln and secession. When secession was an issue, South Carolina
       planter and state Senator John Townsend said that, "our enemies are
       about to take possession of the Government, that they intend to
       rule us according to the caprices of their fanatical theories, and
       according to the declared purposes of abolishing slavery". See John
       Townsend, The Doom of Slavery in the Union, its Safety out of it,
       October 29, 1860. Similar opinions were expressed throughout the
       South in editorials, political speeches and declarations of reasons
       for secession. Even though Lincoln had no plans to outlaw slavery
       where it existed, whites throughout the South expressed fears for
       the future of slavery.^[38]
    5. ^ Before 1850, slave owners controlled the presidency for fifty
       years, the Speaker's chair for forty-one years, and the
       chairmanship of the House Ways and Means Committee that set tariffs
       for forty-two years, while 18 of 31 Supreme Court justices owned
       slaves.^[60]
    6. ^ "Union population 1864" aggregates 1860 population, average
       annual immigration 1855–1864, and population governed formerly by
       CSA per Kenneth Martis source. Contrabands and after the
       Emancipation Proclamation freedmen, migrating into Union control on
       the coasts and to the advancing armies, and natural increase are
       excluded.
    7. ^ "Slave 1864, CSA" aggregates 1860 slave census of VA, NC, SC, GA
       and TX. It omits losses from contraband and after the Emancipation
       Proclamation, freedmen migrating to the Union controlled coastal
       ports and those joining advancing Union armies, especially in the
       Mississippi Valley.
    8. ^ At the beginning of the war, some Union commanders thought they
       were supposed to return escaped slaves to their masters. By 1862,
       when it became clear that this would be a long war, the question of
       what to do about slavery became more general. The Southern economy
       and military effort depended on slave labor. It began to seem
       unreasonable to protect slavery while blockading Southern commerce
       and destroying Southern production. As one Congressman put it, the
       slaves "... cannot be neutral. As laborers, if not as soldiers,
       they will be allies of the rebels, or of the Union."^[241] The same
       Congressman—and his fellow Radical Republicans—put pressure on
       Lincoln to rapidly emancipate the slaves, whereas moderate
       Republicans came to accept gradual, compensated emancipation and
       colonization.^[242] Enslaved African Americans did not wait for
       Lincoln's action before escaping and seeking freedom behind Union
       lines. From early years of the war, hundreds of thousands of
       African Americans escaped to Union lines, especially in occupied
       areas like Nashville, Norfolk and the Hampton Roads region in 1862,
       Tennessee from 1862 on, the line of Sherman's march, etc. So many
       African Americans fled to Union lines that commanders created camps
       and schools for them, where both adults and children learned to
       read and write. See Catton, Bruce. Never Call Retreat, p. 335. The
       American Missionary Association entered the war effort by sending
       teachers south to such contraband camps, for instance establishing
       schools in Norfolk and on nearby plantations. In addition,
       approximately 180,000 or more African-American men served as
       soldiers and sailors with Union troops. Most of those were escaped
       slaves. Probably the most prominent of these African-American
       soldiers is the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry.
    9. ^ In spite of the South's shortage of soldiers, most Southern
       leaders — until 1865 — opposed enlisting slaves. They used them as
       laborers to support the war effort. As Howell Cobb said, "If slaves
       will make good soldiers our whole theory of slavery is wrong."
       Confederate generals Patrick Cleburne and Robert E. Lee argued in
       favor of arming blacks late in the war, and Jefferson Davis was
       eventually persuaded to support plans for arming slaves to avoid
       military defeat. The Confederacy surrendered at Appomattox before
       this plan could be implemented.^[243] The great majority of the 4
       million slaves were freed by the Emancipation Proclamation, as
       Union armies moved south. Historian John D. Winters referred to the
       exhilaration of the slaves when the Union Army came through
       Louisiana: "As the troops moved up to Alexandria, the Negroes
       crowded the roadsides to watch the passing army. They were 'all
       frantic with joy, some weeping, some blessing, and some dancing in
       the exuberance of their emotions.' All of the Negroes were
       attracted by the pageantry and excitement of the army. Others
       cheered because they anticipated the freedom to plunder and to do
       as they pleased now that the Federal troops were there."^[244]
       Confederates enslaved captured black Union soldiers, and black
       soldiers especially were shot when trying to surrender at the Fort
       Pillow Massacre. See Catton, Bruce. Never Call Retreat, p. 335.
       This led to a breakdown of the prisoner and mail exchange program
       and the growth of prison camps such as Andersonville prison in
       Georgia, where almost 13,000 Union prisoners of war died of
       starvation and disease.^[245]

   Citations

    1. ^ ^a ^b "The Belligerent Rights of the Rebels at an End. All
       Nations Warned Against Harboring Their Privateers. If They Do Their
       Ships Will be Excluded from Our Ports. Restoration of Law in the
       State of Virginia. The Machinery of Government to be Put in Motion
       There.". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Associated
       Press. 1865-05-10. Retrieved 2013-12-23.
    2. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Fox, William F. Regimental losses in the American
       Civil War (1889)
    3. ^ ^a ^b ^c Official DOD data
    4. ^ Chambers 1999, p. 849.
    5. ^ "Date of Secession Related to 1860 Black Population", America's
       Civil War
    6. ^ Jones 1999, p. 154.
    7. ^ Frank J. Williams, "Doing Less and Doing More: The President and
       the Proclamation—Legally, Militarily and Politically," in Harold
       Holzer, ed. The Emancipation Proclamation (2006) pp. 74–5.
    8. ^ Hacker 2011, p. 307-348.
    9. ^ Huddleston 2002, p. 3.
   10. ^ The American Civil War. By Garry.W.Gallagher, Stephen D Engle,
       Robert K Krick & Joseph T Glatthaar. Forward By Joseph M. McPherson
   11. ^ James C. Bradford, A companion to American military history
       (2010) vol. 1, p. 101
   12. ^ See sections below this introduction, including citations in
       these four: Freehling, William W., The Road to Disunion:
       Secessionists Triumphant 1854–1861, pp. 9–24, and Martis, Kenneth
       C., "The Historical Atlas of Political Parties in the United States
       Congress, 1789–1989", ISBN 0-02-920170-5, p. 111–115, and Foner,
       Eric. Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil War, Oxford U.
       Press, 1980 ISBN 0-19-502781-7, p. 18–20, 21–24, and Eskridge,
       Larry (Jan 29, 2011). "After 150 years, we still ask: Why 'this
       cruel war'?.". Canton Daily Ledger (Canton, Illinois). Retrieved
       2011-01-29.
   13. ^ Green 2008, p. 291.
   14. ^ Weeks 2013, p. 240.
   15. ^ Olsen 2002, p. 237.
   16. ^ Brunell 2011, p. 136.
   17. ^ Gienapp, William E., "The Crisis of American Democracy: The
       Political System and the Coming of the Civil War" in Boritt ed. Why
       the Civil War Came 79–123. See also Eric Foner, Free Soil, Free
       Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican Party before the
       Civil War (2nd ed. 1995), pp. 311–12.
   18. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 88–91.
   19. ^ In Gerson, Harriet Beecher Stowe, p. 68; See also Stowe, Key to
       Uncle Tom's Cabin (1953), p. 39.
   20. ^ ^a ^b Guelzo 2009, p. 61.
   21. ^ Foner 2010, p. 100.
   22. ^ William W. Freehling, The Road to Disunion: Secessionists
       Triumphant 1854–1861, pp. 9–24. Such fears greatly increased
       Southern efforts to make Kansas a slave state. By 1860, the number
       of white border state families owning slaves plunged to only 16
       percent of the total. Slaves sold to lower South states were owned
       by a smaller number of wealthy slave owners as the price of slaves
       increased.
   23. ^ Eugene D. Genovese, The Political Economy of Slavery: Studies in
       the Economy and Society of the Slave South (Wesleyan U.P,. 1988).
       p. 244
   24. ^ Manisha Sinha, The Counterrevolution of Slavery: Politics and
       Ideology in Antebellum South Carolina (2000), pp. 127–8. Failing
       that, their 1854 Ostend Manifesto was an unsuccessful attempt to
       annex Cuba as a slave state. See Potter, David. The Impending
       Crisis, pp. 201–204.
   25. ^ Lipset 1960, p. 349.
   26. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 242.
   27. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 255.
   28. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 282–283.
   29. ^ Potter 1976, pp. 503–505.
   30. ^ Vote fraud in Kansas
   31. ^ Potter 1976, p. 299-327.
   32. ^ See Williamjames Hoffer, The Caning of Charles Sumner: Honor,
       Idealism, and the Origins of the Civil War (2010), pp. 62, 131–33.
   33. ^ Fehrenbacher 1981, p. 208.
   34. ^ Potter 1976, p. 275.
   35. ^ Foner, Eric. 'Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of
       the Republican Party before the Civil War (2nd ed. 1995),
       pp. 311–12.
   36. ^ Potter 1976, p. 356-384.
   37. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 195.
   38. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 243.
   39. ^ Martis, Kenneth C., "The Historical Atlas of Political Parties in
       the United States Congress, 1789–1989", ISBN 0-02-920170-5,
       p. 111–115. Though elected in November by the Electoral College
       with a plurality of popular votes, he was certified
       Constitutionally elected President by Congress in December before
       the Republican majorities were seated. Both Lincoln and the
       Republican Platform guaranteed no interference with slavery where
       it existed, and in his Inaugural Address he supported the proposed
       Corwin Amendment to Constitutionally restate it. But secessionists
       claimed that such guarantees were meaningless. They feared that
       Republicans would use patronage to incite slaves and antislavery
       Southern whites such as Hinton Rowan Helper. Then they feared
       slavery in the lower South, like a "scorpion encircled by fire
       would sting itself to death". See Freehling, William W., The Road
       to Disunion: Secessionists Triumphant 1854–1861, pp. 9–24. Besides
       the loss of Kansas to free soil Northerners, secessionists feared
       that the loss of slaves in the border states would lead to
       emancipation, and that upper South slave states might be the next
       dominoes to fall.
   40. ^ Schott 1996, p. 334.
   41. ^ http://jacobinmag.com/2012/08/the-war-of-northern-aggression/
   42. ^
       http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1989/jan/19/the-war-of-sou
       thern-aggression/
   43. ^ Eskridge, Larry (Jan 29, 2011). "After 150 years, we still ask:
       Why 'this cruel war'?.". Canton Daily Ledger (Canton, Illinois).
       Retrieved 2011-01-29.  "The power of the federal government to
       affect the institution of slavery, specifically limiting it in
       newly added territories" was the primary political debate in
       Southern states over secession, rather than states' rights in
       general.
   44. ^ Foner 1981, pp. 18–20, 21–24.
   45. ^ ^a ^b Forrest McDonald, States' Rights and the Union: Imperium in
       Imperio, 1776–1876 (2002)
   46. ^ McPherson 2007, pp. 3–9.
   47. ^ Charles S. Sydnor, The Development of Southern Sectionalism
       1819–1848 (1948).
   48. ^ Robert Royal Russel, Economic Aspects of Southern Sectionalism,
       1840–1861 (1973).
   49. ^ Adam Rothman, Slave Country: American Expansion and the Origins
       of the Deep South (2005).
   50. ^ Kenneth M. Stampp, The Imperiled Union: Essays on the Background
       of the Civil War (1981) p. 198; Richard Hofstadter, The Progressive
       Historians: Turner, Beard, Parrington (1969).
   51. ^ Woodworth 1996, p. 145, 151, 505, 512, 554, 557,684.
   52. ^ Clement Eaton, Freedom of Thought in the Old South (1940)
   53. ^ John Hope Franklin, The Militant South 1800–1861 (1956).
   54. ^ Abraham Lincoln, Cooper Union Address, New York, February 27,
       1860.
   55. ^ Ahlstrom 1972, p. 648-649.
   56. ^ James McPherson, "Antebellum Southern Exceptionalism: A New Look
       at an Old Question," Civil War History 29 (September 1983).
   57. ^ Thornton & Ekelund 2004, p. 21.
   58. ^ Frank Taussig, The Tariff History of the United States (1931),
       pp. 115–61
   59. ^ Hofstadter 1938, p. 50-55.
   60. ^ ^a ^b Richards 2000, p. 1-9.
   61. ^ Eric Foner, Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the
       Republican Party before the Civil War (1970).
   62. ^ Bolton 1993, p. 67.
   63. ^ McPherson 2007, p. 14.
   64. ^ Stampp 1990, p. 190-193.
   65. ^ Krannawitter 2008, p. 49-50.
   66. ^ McPherson 2007, pp. 13–14.
   67. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 17-18.
   68. ^ Guelzo 2012, p. 21-22.
   69. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 15.
   70. ^ Miller 2008, p. 153.
   71. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 19.
   72. ^ McPherson 2007, p. 16.
   73. ^ Bestor 1964, pp. 19-21.
   74. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 20.
   75. ^ Russell 1966, p. 468-469.
   76. ^ Bestor 1964, pp. 20-21.
   77. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 21.
   78. ^ Bestor 1964, pp. 21-23.
   79. ^ Johannsen 1973, p. 406.
   80. ^ "Territorial Politics and Government". Territorial Kansas Online:
       University of Kansas and Kansas Historical Society. Retrieved July
       10, 2014.
   81. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 23.
   82. ^ Varon 2008, p. 58.
   83. ^ Russell 1966, p. 470.
   84. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 23-24.
   85. ^ Holt 2005, p. 34-35.
   86. ^ McPherson 2007, p. 7.
   87. ^ Krannawitter 2008, p. 232.
   88. ^ Gara, 1964, p. 190
   89. ^ Bestor 1964, p. 24-25.
   90. ^ Potter 1962, p. 924-950.
   91. ^ C. Vann Woodward (1971), American Counterpoint: Slavery and
       Racism in the North-South Dialogue, p.281.
   92. ^ Bertram Wyatt-Brown, The Shaping of Southern Culture: Honor,
       Grace, and War, 1760s–1880s (2000).
   93. ^ Avery Craven, The Growth of Southern Nationalism, 1848–1861
       (1953).
   94. ^ "Republican Platform of 1860," in Kirk H. Porter, and Donald
       Bruce Johnson, eds. National Party Platforms, 1840–1956,
       (University of Illinois Press, 1956) p. 32.
   95. ^ Susan-Mary Grant, North over South: Northern Nationalism and
       American Identity in the Antebellum Era (2000); Melinda Lawson,
       Patriot Fires: Forging a New American Nationalism in the Civil War
       North (2005).
   96. ^ Potter 1976, p. 485.
   97. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 24.
   98. ^ President James Buchanan, Message of December 8, 1860. Retrieved
       2012-11-28.
   99. ^ "Profile Showing the Grades upon the Different Routes Surveyed
       for the Union Pacific Rail Road Between the Missouri River and the
       Valley of the Platte River". World Digital Library. 1865. Retrieved
       2013-07-16.
   100. ^ Ordinances of Secession by State. Retrieved 2012-11-28.
   101. ^ The text of the Declaration of the Immediate Causes Which Induce
       and Justify the Secession of South Carolina from the Federal Union.
   102. ^ The text of A Declaration of the Immediate Causes which Induce
       and Justify the Secession of the State of Mississippi from the
       Federal Union. Retrieved 2012-11-28.
   103. ^ The text of Georgia's secession declaration. Retrieved
       2012-11-28.
   104. ^ The text of A Declaration of the Causes which Impel the State of
       Texas to Secede from the Federal Union. Retrieved 2012-11-28.
   105. ^ Declaration of Causes of Secession. Retrieved 2012-11-28.
   106. ^ Arrell 1981, p. 117-120.
   107. ^ "United States Volunteers – Indian Troops". civilwararchive.com.
       January 28, 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-10.
   108. ^ "Civil War Refugees". Oklahoma Historical Society. Oklahoma
       State University. Retrieved 2008-08-10.
   109. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 284-287.
   110. ^ Nevins, The War for the Union (1959) 1:119-29.
   111. ^ Nevins, The War for the Union (1959) 1:129-36.
   112. ^ "A State of Convenience, The Creation of West Virginia". West
       Virginia Archives & History. Retrieved 2012-04-20.
   113. ^ Curry, Richard Orr (1964), A House Divided, A Study of the
       Statehood Politics & the Copperhead Movement in West Virginia,
       Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, map on page 49.
   114. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 303.
   115. ^ Weigley 2000, p. 55.
   116. ^ Snell, Mark A., West Virginia and the Civil War, History Press,
       Charleston, SC, 2011, pg. 28
   117. ^ Neely 1993, p. 10-11.
   118. ^ ^a ^b McPherson 1988, pp. 234–266.
   119. ^ ^a ^b Schouler 1899, p. ?.
   120. ^ Abraham Lincoln, First Inaugural Address, Monday, March 4, 1861.
   121. ^ Lincoln, First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1861.
   122. ^ ^a ^b Potter 1976, p. 572-573.
   123. ^ Bornstein, David (April 14, 2011). "Lincoln's Call to Arms".
       Opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com. Archived from the original on
       2011-07-13. Retrieved 2011-08-11.
   124. ^ "Lincoln's Call for Troops".
   125. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 274.
   126. ^ "Abraham Lincoln: Proclamation 83 – Increasing the Size of the
       Army and Navy". Presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved 2011-11-03.
   127. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 276–307.
   128. ^ Keegan, "The American Civil War", p.73. Over 10,000 military
       engagements took place during the war, 40% of them in Virginia and
       Tennessee. See Gabor Boritt, ed. War Comes Again (1995), p. 247.
   129. ^ "With an actual strength of 1,080 officers and 14,926 enlisted
       men on June 30, 1860, the Regular Army ..." Civil War Extracts
       p. 199–221, American Military History.
   130. ^ E. Merton Coulter, Confederate States of America (1950) p.308.
       Accounts of historians differ as to the date and the agency of the
       Confederate 100,000-man call. See also Matloff, Maurice (1973).
       "American Military History". U.S. Army and U.S. Government Printing
       Office, ISBN 0-938289-70-5, ISBN 978-0-938289-70-8. Retrieved
       2012-11-28. , "Secession, Sumter, and Standing to Arms", "... on
       March 6 the new Confederate Executive, Jefferson Davis, called for
       a 100,000-man volunteer force to serve for twelve months ..." . See
       also Civil War extracts, American Military History Online.
       Retrieved 2012-11-28. and Nicolay, J.G. and Hay, John. Abraham
       Lincoln: a history, vol. 4, p.264. Retrieved 2012-11-28. "Since the
       organization of the Montgomery government in February, some four
       different calls for Southern volunteers had been made ... In his
       message of April 29 to the rebel Congress, Jefferson Davis proposed
       to organize for instant action an army of 100,000 ..." Coulter
       reports that Alexander Stephens took this to mean Davis wanted
       unilateral control of a standing army, and from that moment on
       became an implacable opponent.
   131. ^ Albert Burton Moore. Conscription and Conflict in the
       Confederacy (1924) online edition.
   132. ^ Albert Bernhardt Faust, The German Element in the United States
       (1909) v. 1, p. 523 online. The railroads and banks grew rapidly.
       See Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson. Jay Cooke: Financier Of The Civil
       War, (1907) Vol. 2 at Google Books, pp. 378–430. See also
       Oberholtzer, A History of the United States Since the Civil War
       (1926) 3:69–122.
   133. ^ Barnet Schecter, The Devil's Own Work: The Civil War Draft Riots
       and the Fight to Reconstruct America (2007).
   134. ^ Eugene Murdock, One million men: the Civil War draft in the
       North (1971).
   135. ^ Mark Johnson, That body of brave men: the U.S. regular infantry
       and the Civil War in the West (2003) p. 575.
   136. ^ "Desertion No Bar to Pension". New York Times (The New York
       Times Company). May 28, 1894. Retrieved 2011-10-03.
   137. ^ Mark A. Weitz (2005), More Damning than Slaughter: Desertion in
       the Confederate Army.
   138. ^ Coffman 1986, p. 193.
   139. ^ Hamner, Christopher. "Great Expectations for the Civil War."
       Teachinghistory.org. Retrieved 2011-07-11.
   140. ^ Ella Lonn, Desertion during the Civil War (1928), pp. 205–6.
   141. ^ Robert Fantina, Desertion and the American soldier, 1776–2006
       (2006), p. 74
   142. ^ Keegan 2009, p. 57.
   143. ^ Perman 2011, p. 177.
   144. ^ Roger Pickenpaugh (2013). Captives in Blue: The Civil War
       Prisons of the Confederacy. University of Alabama Press.
       pp. 57–73.
   145. ^ Spencer C. Tucker, ed. (2013). American Civil War: The
       Definitive Encyclopedia and Document Collection. ABC-CLIO.
       p. 1466.
   146. ^ Welles 1865, p. 152.
   147. ^ Tucker 2010, p. 462.
   148. ^ Canney 1998, p. ?.
   149. ^ Richter 2009, p. 49.
   150. ^ Johnson 1998, p. 228.
   151. ^ Anderson 1989, p. 288-289, 296–298.
   152. ^ Nelson 2005, p. 92.
   153. ^ ^a ^b Anderson 1989, p. 300.
   154. ^ Gerald F. Teaster and Linda and James Treaster Ambrose, The
       Confederate Submarine H. L. Hunley (1989)
   155. ^ Nelson 2005, p. 345.
   156. ^ Fuller 2008, p. 36.
   157. ^ Mark E. Neely, Jr. "The Perils of Running the Blockade: The
       Influence of International Law in an Era of Total War," Civil War
       History (1986) 32#2, pp. 101–118 in Project MUSE
   158. ^ Stephen R. Wise, Lifeline of the Confederacy: Blockade Running
       during the Civil War (1991)
   159. ^ David G. Surdam, "The Union Navy's blockade reconsidered," Naval
       War College Review (1998) 51#4, pp. 85–107
   160. ^ David G. Surdam, Northern Naval Superiority and the Economics of
       the American Civil War (University of South Carolina Press, 2001)
   161. ^ Jones 2002, p. 225.
   162. ^ Anderson 1989, p. 91.
   163. ^ Robert D. Whitsell, "Military and Naval Activity between Cairo
       and Columbus," Register of the Kentucky Historical Society (1963)
       62#2, pp. 107–121
   164. ^ Myron J. Smith, Tinclads in the Civil War: Union Light-Draught
       Gunboat Operations on Western Waters, 1862–1865 (2009)
   165. ^ Frank 2003, p. 170.
   166. ^ Symonds 2001, p. 92.
   167. ^ Ronald Scott Mangum, "The Vicksburg Campaign: A Study In Joint
       Operations," Parameters: U.S. Army War College (1991) 21#3,
       pp. 74–86 online
   168. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 339–345.
   169. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 342.
   170. ^ Foote 1974, p. 464-519.
   171. ^ Bruce Catton, Terrible Swift Sword, pp. 263–296.
   172. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 424–427.
   173. ^ ^a ^b McPherson 1988, pp. 538–544.
   174. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 528–533.
   175. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 543–545.
   176. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 557–558.
   177. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 571–574.
   178. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 639–645.
   179. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 653–663.
   180. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 664.
   181. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 404–405.
   182. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 418–420.
   183. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 419–420.
   184. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 480–483.
   185. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 405–413.
   186. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 637–638.
   187. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 677–680.
   188. ^ Keegan 2009, p. 100.
   189. ^ ^a ^b Keegan 2009, p. 270.
   190. ^ James B. Martin, Third War: Irregular Warfare on the Western
       Border 1861–1865 (Combat Studies Institute Leavenworth Paper
       series, number 23, 2012). See also, Michael Fellman, Inside War:
       The Guerrilla Conflict in Missouri during the Civil War (1989).
       Missouri alone was the scene of over 1,000 engagements between
       regular units, and uncounted numbers of guerrilla attacks and raids
       by informal pro-Confederate bands, especially in the recently
       settled western counties.
   191. ^ Sarah Bohl, "A War on Civilians: Order Number 11 and the
       Evacuation of Western Missouri," Prologue, (2004) 36#1, pp. 44–51
   192. ^ William H. Graves, "Indian Soldiers for the Gray Army:
       Confederate Recruitment in Indian Territory," Chronicles of
       Oklahoma (1991) 69#2, pp. 134–145.
   193. ^ J. Frederick Neet, Jr. "Stand Watie: Confederate General in the
       Cherokee Nation," Great Plains Journal (1996) 6#1 pp 36–51.
   194. ^ Keegan 2009, p. 220-221.
   195. ^ Mark E. Neely Jr.; "Was the Civil War a Total War?" Civil War
       History, Vol. 50, 2004, pp. 434+
   196. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 724–735.
   197. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 741–742.
   198. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 778–779.
   199. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 773–776.
   200. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 812–815.
   201. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 825–830.
   202. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 846–847.
   203. ^ William Marvel, Lee's Last Retreat: The Flight to Appomattox
       (2002) pp. 158–81.
   204. ^ Unaware of the surrender of Lee, on April 16 the last major
       battles of the war were fought at the Battle of Columbus, Georgia
       and the Battle of West Point.
   205. ^ Morris, John Wesley, Ghost towns of Oklahoma, University of
       Oklahoma Press, 1977, pp. 68–69, ISBN 0-8061-1420-7
   206. ^ ^a ^b ^c McPherson 1988, pp. 546–557.
   207. ^ ^a ^b Herring 2011, p. 237.
   208. ^ ^a ^b McPherson 1988, p. 386.
   209. ^ Allan Nevins, War for the Union 1862–1863, pp. 263–264.
   210. ^ ^a ^b Stephen B. Oates, The Approaching Fury: Voices of the
       Storm 1820–1861, p. 125.
   211. ^ Herring 2011, p. 261.
   212. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 855.
   213. ^ ^a ^b James McPherson, Why did the Confederacy Lose?. p. ?.
   214. ^ Railroad length is from: Chauncey Depew (ed.), One Hundred Years
       of American Commerce 1795–1895, p. 111; For other data see: 1860 US
       census and Carter, Susan B., ed. The Historical Statistics of the
       United States: Millennial Edition (5 vols), 2006.
   215. ^ Martis, Kenneth C., "The Historical Atlas of the Congresses of
       the Confederate States of America: 1861–1865" Simon & Schuster
       (1994) ISBN 0-13-389115-1 pp.27. At the beginning of 1865, the
       Confederacy controlled one-third of its congressional districts,
       which were apportioned by population. The major slave-populations
       found in Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Alabama were
       effectively under Union control by the end of 1864.
   216. ^ Digital History Reader, U.S. Railroad Construction, 1860–1880
       Virginia Tech, Retrieved 2012-08-21. "Total Union railroad miles"
       aggregates existing track reported 1860 @ 21800 plus new
       construction 1860–1864 @ 5000, plus southern railroads administered
       by USMRR @ 2300.
   217. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 771–772.
   218. ^ Murray 1996, p. 235.
   219. ^ Heidler 2002, p. 1207–1210.
   220. ^ Ward 1990, p. 272.
   221. ^ E. Merton Coulter, The Confederate States of America, 1861–1865
       (1950) p. 566
   222. ^ Richard E. Beringer, Herman Hattaway, Archer Jones and William
       N. Still Jr., Why the South Lost the Civil War (1991) ch 1
   223. ^ Armstead Robinson, Bitter Fruits of Bondage: The Demise of
       Slavery and the Collapse of the Confederacy, 1861–1865 (University
       of Virginia Press, 2004)
   224. ^ see Alan Farmer, History Review (2005) No. 52: 15–20.
   225. ^ McPherson 1997, pp. 169–172.
   226. ^ Gallagher 1999, p. 57.
   227. ^ Fehrenbacher, Don (2004). "Lincoln's Wartime Leadership: The
       First Hundred Days". University of Illinois. Retrieved 2007-10-16.
   228. ^ Nofi, Al (June 13, 2001). "Statistics on the War's Costs".
       Louisiana State University. Archived from the original on
       2007-07-11. Retrieved 2007-10-14.
   229. ^ "U.S. Civil War Took Bigger Toll Than Previously Estimated, New
       Analysis Suggests". Science Daily. September 22, 2011. Retrieved
       2011-09-22.
   230. ^ Hacker, J. David (September 20, 2011). "Recounting the Dead".
       The New York Times (The New York Times Company). Associated Press.
       Retrieved 2011-09-22.
   231. ^ McPherson 1988, p. xix.
   232. ^ Vinovskis 1990, p. 7.
   233. ^ Richard Wightman Fox (2008)."National Life After Death".
       Slate.com.
   234. ^ "U.S. Civil War Prison Camps Claimed Thousands". National
       Geographic News. July 1, 2003.
   235. ^ Teresa Riordan (2004-03-08). "When Necessity Meets Ingenuity:
       Art of Restoring What's Missing". The New York Times. The New York
       Times Company. Associated Press. Retrieved 2013-12-23.
   236. ^ The Economist, "The Civil War: Finally Passing", April 2, 2011,
       pp. 23–25.
   237. ^ Foner 1981, p. ?.
   238. ^ Foner 2010, p. 74.
   239. ^ McPherson, pp. 506–8
   240. ^ McPherson. p. 686
   241. ^ McPherson 1988, p. 495.
   242. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 355, 494–496, 495.
   243. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 831–837.
   244. ^ Winters 1963, p. 237.
   245. ^ McPherson 1988, pp. 791–798.
   246. ^ Lincoln's letter to O. H. Browning, September 22, 1861.
       Sentiment among German Americans was largely anti-slavery
       especially among Forty-Eighters, resulting in hundreds of thousands
       of German Americans volunteering to fight for the Union. " Wittke,
       Carl (1952). Refugees of Revolution. Philadelphia: University of
       Pennsylvania press.  ", Christian B. Keller, "Flying Dutchmen and
       Drunken Irishmen: The Myths and Realities of Ethnic Civil War
       Soldiers", Journal of Military History, Vol/ 73, No. 1, January
       2009, pp. 117–145; for primary sources see Walter D. Kamphoefner
       and Wolfgang Helbich, eds., Germans in the Civil War: The Letters
       They Wrote Home (2006). " On the other hand, many of the recent
       immigrants in the North viewed freed slaves as competition for
       scarce jobs, and as the reason why the Civil War was being fought.
       " Baker, Kevin (March 2003). "Violent City" American Heritage.
       Retrieved 2010-07-29. " Due in large part to this fierce
       competition with free blacks for labor opportunities, the poor and
       working class Irish Catholics generally opposed emancipation. When
       the draft began in the summer of 1863, they launched a major riot
       in New York City that was suppressed by the military, as well as
       much smaller protests in other cities. Barnet Schecter, The Devil's
       Own Work: The Civil War Draft Riots and the Fight to Reconstruct
       America (2007), ch 6. Many Catholics in the North had volunteered
       to fight in 1861, sending thousands of soldiers to the front and
       taking high casualties, especially at Fredericksburg; their
       volunteering fell off after 1862.
   247. ^ Baker, Kevin (March 2003). "Violent City" American Heritage.
       Retrieved 2010-07-29. "
   248. ^ McPherson, James in Gabor S. Boritt, ed. Lincoln, the War
       President pp. 52–54.
   249. ^ Oates, Stephen B. Abraham Lincoln: The Man Behind the Myths,
       p. 106.
   250. ^ "Lincoln Letter to Greeley, August 22, 1862 "
   251. ^ Pulling, Sr. Anne Francis. "Images of America: Altoona, 2001,
       10.
   252. ^ Lincoln's Letter to A. G. Hodges, April 4, 1864.
   253. ^ Harper, Douglas (2003). "SLAVERY in DELAWARE". Archived from the
       original on 2007-10-16. Retrieved 2007-10-16.
   254. ^ " James McPherson, The War that Never Goes Away"
   255. ^ Asante 2004, p. 82.
   256. ^ Holzer 2007, p. 172-174.
   257. ^ Murray pp. 155-159.
   258. ^ Hans L. Trefousse, Historical Dictionary of Reconstruction
       (Greenwood, 1991) covers all the main events and leaders.
   259. ^ Eric Foner, A Short History of Reconstruction (1990) is a brief
       survey
   260. ^ Hans L Trefousse, Thaddeus Stevens: Nineteenth-Century
       Egalitarian (2005) pp 161–238
   261. ^ C. Vann Woodward, Reunion and Reaction: The Compromise of 1877
       and the End of Reconstruction (2nd ed. 1991).
   262. ^ Joan Waugh and Gary W. Gallagher, eds. (2009), Wars within a
       War: Controversy and Conflict over the American Civil War (U. of
       North Carolina Press).
   263. ^ David W. Blight, Race and Reunion : The Civil War in American
       Memory (2001)
   264. ^ Wilson Fallin Jr., Uplifting the People: Three Centuries of
       Black Baptists in Alabama (2007) pp 52-53
   265. ^ Gaines M. Foster (1988), Ghosts of the Confederacy: Defeat, the
       Lost Cause and the Emergence of the New South, 1865–1913.
   266. ^ Nolan, Alan T. in Gallagher, Gary W. and Alan T. Nolan, The Myth
       of the Lost Cause and Civil War history, (2000) pp 12-19.
   267. ^ Nolan, ''The Myth of the Lost Cause pp. 28-29.
   268. ^ Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard, The Rise of American
       Civilization (1927), 2:54
   269. ^ Richard Hofstadter (1968, reprint 2012). Progressive Historians.
       Knopf Doubleday. p. 304.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
   270. ^ ^a ^b Gary Gallagher, Causes Won, Lost, and Forgotten: How
       Hollywood and Popular Art Shape What We Know about the Civil War
       (U. of North Carolina Press, 2008)

   Bibliography

     * Ahlstrom, Sydney E. (1972). A Religious History of the American
       People. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-300-01762-5.
     * Anderson, Bern (1989). By Sea And By River: The naval history of
       the Civil War. New York, New York: Da Capo Press.
       ISBN 978-0-306-80367-3.
     * Asante, Molefi Kete; Mazama, Ama (2004). Encyclopedia of Black
       Studies (1 ed.). Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications.
       ISBN 978-0-7619-2762-4.
     * Beringer, Richard E., Archer Jones, and Herman Hattaway, Why the
       South Lost the Civil War (1986) influential analysis of factors; an
       abridged version is The Elements of Confederate Defeat:
       Nationalism, War Aims, and Religion (1988)
     * Bestor, Arthur (1964). "The American Civil War as a Constitutional
       Crisis". American Historical Review 69 (2): 327–52. JSTOR 1844986.
     * Bolton, Charles C. (1993). Poor Whites of the Antebellum South:
       Tenants and Laborers in Central North Carolina and Northeast
       Mississippi. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-8223-1468-4.
     * Brunell, Miriam; Paris, Leslie (2011). The Girls' History and
       Culture Reader: The Nineteenth Century. Urbana, Illinois:
       University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07765-4.
     * Canney, Donald L. (1998). Lincoln's Navy: The Ships, Men and
       Organization, 1861–65. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.
       ISBN 978-1-55750-519-4.
     * Catton, Bruce (1960). The Civil War. New York: American Heritage
       Distributed by Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-8281-0305-3.
     * Chambers, John W.; Anderson, Fred (1999). The Oxford Companion to
       American Military History. Oxford, New York: Oxford University
       Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507198-6.
     * Coffman, Edward M. (1988). The Old Army: A Portrait of the American
       Army in Peacetime, 1784–1898. Oxford, New York: Oxford University
       Press. ISBN 978-0-19-504555-0.
     * Davis, William C. (1983). Stand in the Day of Battle: The Imperiled
       Union : 1861–1865. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
       ISBN 978-0-385-14895-5.
     * Davis, William C. (2003). Look Away!: A History of the Confederate
       States of America. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-3499-3.
     * Donald, David; Baker, Jean H.; Holt, Michael F. (2001). The Civil
       War and Reconstruction. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
       ISBN 978-0-393-97427-0.
     * Eicher, David J. (2001). The Longest Night: A Military History of
       the Civil War. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-84944-7.
     * Fehrenbacher, Don E. (1981). Slavery, Law, and Politics: The Dred
       Scott Case in Historical Perspective. Oxford, New York: Oxford
       University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-502883-6.
     * Fellman, Michael; Gordon, Lesley J.; Sunderland, Daniel E. (2007).
       This Terrible War: The Civil War and its Aftermath (2 ed.). New
       York: Pearson. ISBN 978-0-321-38960-2.
     * Foner, Eric (1981). Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil
       War. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-19-502926-0. Retrieved 2012-04-20.
     * Foner, Eric (2010). The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American
       Slavery. New York: W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0-393-34066-2.
     * Foote, Shelby (1974). The Civil War: A Narrative: Volume 1: Fort
       Sumter to Perryville. New York: Vintage Books.
       ISBN 978-0-394-74623-4.
     * Frank, Joseph Allan; Reaves, George A. (2003). Seeing the Elephant:
       Raw Recruits at the Battle of Shiloh. Urbana, Illinois: University
       of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07126-3.
     * Fuller, Howard J. (2008). Clad in Iron – The American Civil War and
       the Challenge of British Naval Power. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval
       Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-297-3.
     * Gallagher, Gary W. (1999). The Confederate War. Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-16056-9.
     * Gara, Larry. 1964. The Fugitive Slave Law: A Double Paradox in
       Essays on the Civil War and Reconstruction, New York: Holt,
       Rinehart and Winston, 1970. (originally published in Civil War
       History, X, No. 3, Sept 1964)
     * Gibson, Arrell M. (1981). Oklahoma, a History of Five Centuries.
       Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.
       ISBN 978-0-8061-1758-4.
     * Green, Fletcher M. (2008). Constitutional Development in the South
       Atlantic States, 1776–1860: A Study in the Evolution of Democracy.
       Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press.
       ISBN 978-1-58477-928-5.
     * Guelzo, Allen C. (2009). Lincoln: A Very Short Introduction.
       Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-536780-5.
     * Guelzo, Allen C. (2012). Fateful Lightning: A New History of the
       Civil War and Reconstruction. Oxford, New York: Oxford University
       Press. ISBN 978-0-19-984328-2.
     * Hacker, J. David (December 2011). "A Census-Based Count of the
       Civil War Dead". Civil War History 57 (4): 307–348.
       doi:10.1353/cwh.2011.0061.
     * Heidler, David S.; Heidler, Jeanne T.; Coles, David J. (2002).
       Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and
       Military History. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO.
       ISBN 1-57607-382-3.
     * Herring, George C. (2011). From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign
       Relations since 1776. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-19-976553-9.
     * Hofstadter, Richard (1938). "The Tariff Issue on the Eve of the
       Civil War". American Historical Review 44 (1): 50–55.
       JSTOR 1840850.
     * Holt, Michael F. (2005). The Fate of Their Country: Politicians,
       Slavery Extension, and the Coming of the Civil War. New York: Hill
       and Wang. ISBN 978-0-8090-4439-9.
     * Holzer, Harold; Gabbard, Sara Vaughn (2007). Lincoln and Freedom:
       Slavery, Emancipation, and the Thirteenth Amendment. Carbondale,
       Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-8093-2764-5.
     * Huddleston, John (2002). Killing Ground: The Civil War and the
       Changing American Landscape. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins
       University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6773-6.
     * Johannsen, Robert W. (1973). Stephen A. Douglas. New York: Oxford
       University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-501620-8.
     * Johnson, Timothy D. (1998). Winfield Scott: The Quest for Military
       Glory. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas.
       ISBN 978-0-7006-0914-7.
     * Jones, Howard (1999). Abraham Lincoln and a New Birth of Freedom:
       The Union and Slavery in the Diplomacy of the Civil War. Lincoln,
       Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-2582-4.
     * Jones, Howard (2002). Crucible of Power: A History of American
       Foreign Relations to 1913. Wilmington, Delaware: Rowman &
       Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8420-2916-2.
     * Katcher, Philip (2002). The History of the American Civil War 1861
       – 1865. London: Hamlyn. ISBN 978-0-600-60778-6.
     * Keegan, John (2009). The American Civil War: A Military History.
       New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-26343-8.
     * Krannawitter, Thomas L. (2008). Vindicating Lincoln : defending the
       politics of our greatest president. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman &
       Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 0-7425-5972-6.
     * Lipset, Seymour Martin (1960). Political Man: The Social Bases of
       Politics. Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc.
     * McPherson, James M. (1988). Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War
       Era. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-19-503863-7.
     * McPherson, James M. (1992). Ordeal By Fire : The Civil War and
       Reconstruction (2 ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
       ISBN 978-0-07-045842-0.
     * McPherson, James M. (1997). For Cause and Comrades: Why Men Fought
       in the Civil War. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-19-974105-2.
     * McPherson, James M. (2007). This Mighty Scourge: Perspectives on
       the Civil War. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-19-539242-5.
     * Miller, William L. (2008). President Lincoln: The Duty of a
       Statesman. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 1-4000-4103-1.
     * Thornton, Mark; Ekelund, Robert Burton (2004). Tariffs, Blockades,
       and Inflation: The Economics of the Civil War. Rowman &
       Littlefield.
     * Murray, Robert Bruce. Legal Cases of the Civil War. (2003) ISBN
       0-8117-0059-3
     * Murray, Williamson; Bernstein, Alvin; Knox, MacGregor (1996). The
       Making of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War. Cabmbridge, New York:
       Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-56627-8.
     * Neely, Mark (1993). Confederate Bastille: Jefferson Davis and Civil
       Liberties. Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Marquette University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-87462-325-3.
     * Nelson, James L. (2005). Reign of Iron: The Story of the First
       Battling Ironclads, the Monitor and the Merrimack. New York:
       HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-052404-3.
     * Nevins, Allan. Ordeal of the Union, an 8-volume set (1947–1971).
       the most detailed political, economic and military narrative; by
       Pulitzer Prize winner
          + 1. Fruits of Manifest Destiny, 1847–1852; 2. A House Dividing,
            1852–1857; 3. Douglas, Buchanan, and Party Chaos, 1857–1859;
            4. Prologue to Civil War, 1859–1861; vol. 5–8 have the series
            title "War for the Union"; 5. The Improvised War, 1861–1862;
            6. War Becomes Revolution, 1862–1863; 7. The Organized War,
            1863–1864; 8. The Organized War to Victory, 1864–1865
     * Olsen, Christopher J. (2002). Political Culture and Secession in
       Mississippi: Masculinity, Honor, and the Antiparty Tradition,
       1830–1860. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-19-516097-0.
     * Perman, Michael; Taylor, Amy M. (2010). Major Problems in the Civil
       War and Reconstruction: Documents and Essays (3 ed.). Boston,
       Massachusetts: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.
       ISBN 978-0-618-87520-7.
     * Potter, David M. (1962). "The Historian's Use of Nationalism and
       Vice Versa". American Historical Review 67 (4): 924–950.
       JSTOR 1845246.
     * Potter, David M.; Fehrenbacher, Don E. (1976). The Impending
       Crisis, 1848–1861. New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-013403-7.
     * Quarstein, John V. (1999). The Battle of the Ironclads. Arcadia
       Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7385-0113-0.
     * Rhodes, John Ford (1917). History of the Civil War, 1861–1865. New
       York: The Macmillan Company.
     * Richards, Leonard L. (2000). The Slave Power: The Free North and
       Southern Domination, 1780–1860. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana
       State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-2600-4.
     * Richter, William L. (2009). The A to Z of the Civil War and
       Reconstruction. Lanham: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6336-1.
     * Russell, Robert R. (1966). "Constitutional Doctrines with Regard to
       Slavery in Territories". Journal of Southern History 32 (4):
       466–486. doi:10.2307/2204926. JSTOR 2204926.
     * Schott, Thomas E. (1996). Alexander H. Stephens of Georgia: A
       Biography. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University
       Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-2106-1.
     * Schouler, William (1899). The Civil War (History of the United
       States of America Under the Constitution, Volume VI 1861–1865).
       Dodd, Mead & Company. ASIN B00088INOY.
     * Stampp, Kenneth M. (1990). America in 1857: A Nation on the Brink.
       Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-503902-5.
     * Symonds, Craig L.; Clipson, William J. (2001). The Naval Institute
       Historical Atlas of the U.S. Navy. Naval Institute Press.
       ISBN 978-1-55750-984-0.
     * Tucker, Spencer C.; Pierpaoli, Paul G.; White, William E. (2011).
       The Civil War Naval Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California:
       ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-59884-338-5.
     * Varon, Elizabeth R. (2008). Disunion!: The Coming of the American
       Civil War, 1789–1859. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of
       North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-3232-5.
     * Vinovskis, Maris (1990). Toward a Social History of the American
       Civil War: Exploratory Essays. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
       University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-39559-5.
     * Ward, Geoffrey R. (1990). The Civil War: An Illustrated History.
       New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-394-56285-8.
     * Weeks, William E. (2013). The New Cambridge History of American
       Foreign Relations. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
       ISBN 978-1-107-00590-7.
     * Weigley, Frank Russell (2004). A Great Civil War: A Military and
       Political History, 1861–1865. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana
       University Press. ISBN 0-253-33738-0.
     * Welles, Gideon (1865). Secretary of the Navy's Report. 37–38.
       American Seamen's Friend Society.
     * Winters, John D. (1963). The Civil War in Louisiana. Baton Rouge,
       Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press.
       ISBN 978-0-8071-0834-5.
     * Woodworth, Steven E. (1996). American Civil War: A Handbook of
       Literature and Research. Wesport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
       ISBN 978-0-313-29019-0.

Further reading

     * Gugliotta, Guy. New Estimate Raises Civil War Death Toll, The New
       York Times, April 3, 2012, pg. D1 (of the New York edition), and
       April 2, 2012 on NYTimes.com. Retrieved 2012-04-03 online.
     * Bibliography of the American Civil War
     * Bibliography of American Civil War naval history

External links

   Wikiquote has quotations related to: American Civil War
   Wikimedia Commons has media related to American Civil War.
     * American Civil War at DMOZ
     * Civil War photos at the National Archives
     * View images from the Civil War Photographs Collection at the
       Library of Congress
     * Civil War Trust
     * Civil War Era Digital Collection at Gettysburg College This
       collection contains digital images of political cartoons, personal
       papers, pamphlets, maps, paintings and photographs from the Civil
       War Era held in Special Collections at Gettysburg College.
     * Civil War 150 Washington Post interactive website on 150th
       Anniversary of the American Civil War.
     * Civil War in the American South – An Association of Southeastern
       Research Libraries (ASERL) portal with links to almost 9,000
       digitized Civil War-era items—books, pamphlets, broadsides,
       letters, maps, personal papers, and manuscripts—held at ASERL
       member libraries
     * The Civil War – site with 7,000 pages, including the complete run
       of Harper's Weekly newspapers from the Civil War
     * The short film A HOUSE DIVIDED (1960) is available for free
       download at the Internet Archive [more]
     * Civil War Living History Reenactments (videos)
     * West Point Atlas of Civil War Battles


     * v
     * t
     * e

   American Civil War


   Origins

     * Origins
     * Issues

                  * Timeline leading to the War
                  * Antebellum era
                  * Bleeding Kansas
                  * Border states
                  * Dred Scott v. Sandford
                  * Missouri Compromise
                  * Secession
                  * States' rights
                  * President Lincoln's 75,000 Volunteers

     Slavery
                  * African-Americans
                  * Emancipation Proclamation
                  * Fugitive slave laws
                  * Slave Power
                  * Uncle Tom's Cabin

   Abolitionism
                  * John Brown
                  * Frederick Douglass
                  * William Lloyd Garrison
                  * Lysander Spooner
                  * Harriet Tubman
                  * Underground Railroad


     * Combatants
     * Theaters
     * Campaigns
     * Battles
     * States


       Combatants

                         Union (USA)
                                          * Army
                                          * Navy
                                          * Marine Corps
                                          * Revenue Cutter Service

                      Confederacy (CSA)
                                          * Army
                                          * Navy
                                          * Marine Corps

        Theaters
                        * Eastern
                        * Western
                        * Lower Seaboard
                        * Trans-Mississippi
                        * Pacific Coast
                        * Union naval blockade

        Campaigns
                        * Anaconda Plan
                        * Blockade runners of the American Civil War
                        * New Mexico
                        * Jackson's Valley
                        * Peninsula
                        * Northern Virginia
                        * Maryland
                        * Stones River
                        * Vicksburg
                        * Tullahoma
                        * Gettysburg
                        * Morgan's Raid
                        * Bristoe
                        * Knoxville
                        * Red River
                        * Overland
                        * Atlanta
                        * Valley 1864
                        * Bermuda Hundred
                        * Richmond-Petersburg
                        * Franklin–Nashville
                        * Price's Raid
                        * Sherman's March
                        * Carolinas
                        * Appomattox

      Major battles
                        * Fort Sumter
                        * 1st Bull Run
                        * Wilson's Creek
                        * Fort Donelson
                        * Pea Ridge
                        * Hampton Roads
                        * Shiloh
                        * New Orleans
                        * Corinth
                        * Seven Pines
                        * Seven Days
                        * 2nd Bull Run
                        * Antietam
                        * Perryville
                        * Fredericksburg
                        * Stones River
                        * Chancellorsville
                        * Gettysburg
                        * Vicksburg
                        * Chickamauga
                        * Chattanooga
                        * Wilderness
                        * Spotsylvania
                        * Cold Harbor
                        * Atlanta
                        * Mobile Bay
                        * Franklin
                        * Nashville
                        * Five Forks

     Involvement (by
   state or territory)
                        * AL
                        * AR
                        * AZ
                        * CA
                        * CO
                        * CT
                        * DC
                        * DE
                        * FL
                        * GA
                        * ID
                        * IL
                        * IN
                        * IA
                        * KS
                        * KY
                        * LA
                        * ME
                        * MD
                        * MA
                        * MI
                        * MN
                        * MS
                        * MO
                        * MT
                        * NV
                        * NE
                        * NH
                        * NJ
                        * NM
                        * NY
                        * NC
                        * OH
                        * OK
                        * OR
                        * PA
                        * RI
                        * SC
                        * TN
                        * TX
                        * UT
                        * VT
                        * VA
                        * WV
                        * WI


   Leaders

   Confederate

               Military
                          * R.H. Anderson
                          * Beauregard
                          * Bragg
                          * Cooper
                          * Early
                          * Ewell
                          * Forrest
                          * Gorgas
                          * Hill
                          * Hood
                          * Jackson
                          * A.S. Johnston
                          * J.E. Johnston
                          * Lee
                          * Longstreet
                          * Morgan
                          * Mosby
                          * Price
                          * Quantrill
                          * Semmes
                          * E.K. Smith
                          * Stuart
                          * Taylor
                          * Wheeler

               Civilian
                          * Benjamin
                          * Bocock
                          * Breckinridge
                          * Davis
                          * Hunter
                          * Mallory
                          * Memminger
                          * Seddon
                          * Stephens

      Union

               Military
                          * Anderson
                          * Buell
                          * Butler
                          * Burnside
                          * Du Pont
                          * Farragut
                          * Foote
                          * Frémont
                          * Grant
                          * Halleck
                          * Hooker
                          * Hunt
                          * McClellan
                          * McDowell
                          * Meade
                          * Meigs
                          * Ord
                          * Pope
                          * D.D. Porter
                          * Rosecrans
                          * Scott
                          * Sheridan
                          * Sherman
                          * Thomas

               Civilian
                          * Adams
                          * Chase
                          * Ericsson
                          * Hamlin
                          * Lincoln
                          * Pinkerton
                          * Seward
                          * Stanton
                          * Stevens
                          * Wade
                          * Welles


   Aftermath

   U.S. Constitution
                       * 13th Amendment
                       * 14th Amendment
                       * 15th Amendment

    Reconstruction
                       * Alabama Claims
                       * Carpetbaggers
                       * Freedman's Bank
                       * Freedmen's Bureau
                       * Jim Crow laws
                       * Redeemers
                       * Southern Claims Commission

      Cemeteries
                       * Confederate monuments and memorials
                       * National cemeteries
                       * U.S. monuments and memorials

       Veterans
                       * Grand Army of the Republic
                       * Old soldiers' homes
                       * United Confederate Veterans

     Other topics
                       * Ku Klux Klan
                       * Lost Cause


     * Related topics
     * Categories


   Related topics

                    Military
                                 * Balloons
                                 * Bushwhacker
                                 * Cavalry
                                 * Field artillery
                                 * Medicine
                                 * Military leadership
                                 * Naval battles
                                 * Official Records
                                 * Signal Corps
                                 * Turning points

                   Political
                                 * Committee on the Conduct of the War
                                 * Copperheads
                                 * Political General
                                 * Radical Republicans
                                 * Trent Affair
                                 * War Democrats
                                 * Confederate war finance

                  Other topics
                                 * Bibliography
                                 * Draft Riots
                                 * Music
                                 * Names of the War
                                 * National cemeteries
                                 * Native Americans
                                 * Photography
                                 * Rail transport
                                 * Supreme Court cases
                                 * U.S. Sanitary Commission
                                 * Historical reenactment
                                 * Commemoration

     Categories
                    * American Civil War
                    * People
                    * Battles
                    * Union Army generals
                    * Union armies
                    * Union Army corps
                    * Confederate States of America (CSA)
                    * Confederate Army generals
                    * Confederate armies
                    * Spies
                    * National Battlefields
                    * Veterans' organizations
                    * Medicine
                    * Museums
                    * Forts
                    * Old soldiers' homes
                    * Prisons
                    * Reconstruction
                    * U.S. monuments and memorials
                    * Confederate monuments and memorials


   At sister Wikimedia projects

     * Wiktionary-logo-en.svg American Civil War at Wiktionary

     * Wikisource-logo.svg Source texts at Wikisource

     * Wikibooks-logo.svg Textbooks at Wikibooks

     * Commons-logo.svg Images and media at the Commons

     * Wikiquote-logo.svg Quotations at Wikiquote

     * Wikinews-logo.svg News stories at Wikinews

     * Wikipedia page Outline
     * Portal Portal
     * WikiProject WikiProject
     * WikiProject "Brothers at War" WikiProject


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Foreign countries in the American Civil War
   Australia  · Bahamas  · Belize  · Britain  · Canada  · Cuba  · France
   · Mexico  · Prussia  · Russia
   Bonnie Blue Flag

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Major armed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forces
   listed chronologically
   Internal
     * Shays' Rebellion
     * Whiskey Rebellion
     * Dorr Rebellion
     * Mormon War
     * Bleeding Kansas
     * Utah War
     * Civil War
     * Indian Wars
     * Brooks–Baxter War
     * Coal Creek War
     * Homestead Strike
     * Battle of Blair Mountain
     * Bonus Army

   International
     * Revolutionary War
     * Quasi-War
     * First Barbary War
     * War of 1812
     * Second Barbary War
     * First Sumatran expedition
     * Second Sumatran expedition
     * Ivory Coast Expedition
     * Mexican–American War
     * First Fiji Expedition
     * Second Opium War
     * Second Fiji Expedition
     * Formosa Expedition
     * Korean Expedition
     * Spanish–American War
     * Philippine–American War
     * Boxer Rebellion
     * Banana Wars
     * Border War
     * World War I
     * Russian Civil War
     * World War II
     * Korean War
     * Vietnam War
     * Invasion of the Dominican Republic
     * Invasion of Grenada
     * Lebanese Civil War
     * Invasion of Panama
     * Gulf War
     * Somali Civil War
     * Bosnian War
     * Kosovo War
     * Afghanistan War
     * Iraq War
     * War in North-West Pakistan
     * Libyan Civil War
     * 2014 Iraq Intervention

   Related articles
     * List of conflicts in the U.S.
     * List of wars involving the U.S.
     * Timeline of U.S. military operations
     * Length of U.S. participation in major wars
     * Overseas expansion
     * Military history
     * Covert regime-change actions
     * Casualties of war


           * v
     * t
     * e

   History of the United States
   Timeline
              * Prehistory
              * Pre-Columbian
              * Colonial
              * 1776–89
              * 1789–1849
              * 1849–65
              * 1865–1918
              * 1918–45
              * 1945–64
              * 1964–80
              * 1980–91
              * 1991–present

    Topics
              * African American
              * Asian American
              * Cities
              * Demographic
              * Diplomatic
              * Economic
              * Education
              * Immigration
              * Indian American
              * Jewish
              * Medical
              * Merchant Marine
              * Mexican American
              * Military
              * Musical
              * Native American
              * Polish
              * Religious
              * Southern
              * Stamps
              * Technological and industrial
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Women

     * Category Category
     * Portal Portal


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Civil_War&oldid=625
   974293"
   Categories:
     * American Civil War
     * Rebellions in the United States
     * Wars involving the United States
     * 1860s in the United States
     * Wars of independence

   Hidden categories:
     * CS1 errors: dates
     * Use mdy dates from July 2013
     * Use American English from October 2013
     * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
     * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
     * Articles with DMOZ links

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * View source
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Afrikaans
     * Alemannisch
     * Ænglisc
     * العربية
     * Aragonés
     * Asturianu
     * Azərbaycanca
     * বাংলা
     * Bân-lâm-gú
     * Беларуская
     * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
     * Bikol Central
     * Български
     * Boarisch
     * Bosanski
     * Brezhoneg
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Corsu
     * Cymraeg
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Eesti
     * Ελληνικά
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Fiji Hindi
     * Føroyskt
     * Français
     * Frysk
     * Gaeilge
     * Gàidhlig
     * Galego
     * 한국어
     * Հայերեն
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Ido
     * Ilokano
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Interlingua
     * Íslenska
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * ಕನ್ನಡ
     * Къарачай-малкъар
     * ქართული
     * Қазақша
     * Kiswahili
     * Лезги
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * Lietuvių
     * Ligure
     * Limburgs
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * മലയാളം
     * Malti
     * मराठी
     * مصرى
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Baso Minangkabau
     * Mirandés
     * Монгол
     * မြန်မာဘာသာ
     * Nederlands
     * नेपाल भाषा
     * 日本語
     * Napulitano
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Occitan
     * Oromoo
     * Oʻzbekcha
     * پنجابی
     * Plattdüütsch
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русиньскый
     * Русский
     * Саха тыла
     * Sardu
     * Seeltersk
     * Shqip
     * Sicilianu
     * සිංහල
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Slovenščina
     * کوردی
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * Tagalog
     * தமிழ்
     * Татарча/tatarça
     * ไทย
     * ᏣᎳᎩ
     * Türkçe
     * Türkmençe
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * Võro
     * 文言
     * Winaray
     * ייִדיש
     * Yorùbá
     * 粵語
     * Žemaitėška
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 17 September 2014 at 17:38.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
