   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

United States House of Representatives

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   For the current congress, see 113th United States Congress. For the
   current list of House districts, see List of United States
   congressional districts.
                    United States House of Representatives
   113th United States Congress
   Seal of the U.S. House of Representatives
   Seal of the House
   Flag of the United States House of Representatives
   Flag of the House
                                     Type
          Type
                      Lower house of the United States Congress
       Term limits
                      None
                                    History
   New session started
                      January 3, 2013 (2013-01-03)
                                  Leadership
         Speaker
                      John Boehner (R)
                      since January 5, 2011
     Majority Leader
                      Kevin McCarthy (R)
                      since August 1, 2014
     Minority Leader
                      Nancy Pelosi (D)
                      since January 3, 2011
                                   Structure
          Seats       435 voting members
                      6 non-voting members
   113USHouseStructure.svg
    Political groups
                        *      Republican (233)
                        *      Democratic (199)
                        *      vacant (3)

     Length of term
                      2 years
                                   Elections
      Voting system
                      First-past-the-post
      Last election
                      November 6, 2012
      Next election
                      November 4, 2014
      Redistricting   State legislatures or redistricting commissions, varies
                      by state
                                 Meeting place
   Obama Health Care Speech to Joint Session of Congress.jpg
   House of Representatives chamber
   United States Capitol
   Washington, D.C., United States
                                    Website
   www.house.gov
                   United States
   Great Seal of the United States (obverse).svg
   This article is part of a series on the
   politics and government of
   the United States
   Federal government
     * Constitution
     * Law
     * Taxation

   Legislature
     * Congress
          + House
               o Speaker
               o Party leaders
               o Congressional districts
          + Senate
               o President pro tempore
               o Party leaders

   Executive
     * President
     * Vice President
     * Cabinet
     * Federal agencies

   Judiciary
     * Supreme Court
     * Courts of Appeals
     * District Courts
     * Other tribunals

   Elections
     * Presidential elections
     * Midterm elections
     * Off-year elections

   Political parties
     * Democratic
     * Republican
     * Third parties

   Federalism
     * State government
          + Governors
          + Legislatures (List)
          + State courts
     * Local government

     * Other countries
     * Atlas

   Portal icon Politics portal
     * v
     * t
     * e

   The United States House of Representatives is one of the two houses of
   the United States Congress (a bicameral legislature). It is frequently
   referred to as The House. The other house is the Senate.

   The composition and powers of the House are established in Article One
   of the United States Constitution. The major power of the House is to
   pass federal legislation that affects the entire country, although its
   bills must also be passed by the Senate and further agreed to by the
   U.S. President before becoming law (unless both the House and Senate
   re-pass the legislation with a two-thirds majority in each chamber).
   The House has some exclusive powers: the power to initiate revenue
   bills,^[1] to impeach officials (impeached officials are subsequently
   tried in the Senate),^[2] and to elect the U.S. President in case there
   is no majority in the Electoral College.^[3]

   Each U.S. state is represented in the House in proportion to its
   population as measured in the census, but every state is entitled to at
   least one representative. The most populous state, California,
   currently has 53 representatives. On the other end of the spectrum,
   there are seven states with only one representative each (Alaska,
   Delaware, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming).
   The total number of voting representatives is fixed by law at 435.^[4]
   Each representative serves for a two-year term. The Speaker of the
   House, who presides over the chamber, is elected by the members of the
   House, and is therefore traditionally the leader of the House
   Democratic Caucus or the House Republican Conference, whichever party
   has more voting members. The House meets in the south wing of the
   United States Capitol.

Contents

     * 1 History
     * 2 Membership, qualifications and apportionment
          + 2.1 Apportionment
          + 2.2 Redistricting
          + 2.3 Qualifications
          + 2.4 Elections
          + 2.5 Terms
     * 3 Comparison to the Senate
     * 4 Salary and benefits
          + 4.1 Salaries
          + 4.2 Titles
          + 4.3 Pension
          + 4.4 Tax deductions
          + 4.5 Health and life insurance
          + 4.6 Personnel, mail and office expenses
          + 4.7 Travel allowance
     * 5 Officers
          + 5.1 Member officials
               o 5.1.1 Leadership and partisanship
          + 5.2 Non-member officials
     * 6 Procedure
          + 6.1 Daily procedures
          + 6.2 Passage of legislation
     * 7 Committees
     * 8 Legislative functions
     * 9 Checks and balances
     * 10 Latest election results and current party standings
          + 10.1 Current standing
          + 10.2 End of previous Congress
     * 11 See also
          + 11.1 Membership lists
          + 11.2 113th Congress
     * 12 References
          + 12.1 Surveys
          + 12.2 Notes
     * 13 External links

History[edit]

   Main article: History of the United States House of Representatives

   Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress was a unicameral body in
   which each state held only one vote. After eight years of a more
   limited federal government under the Articles, numerous political
   leaders, such as James Madison and Alexander Hamilton, initiated the
   Constitutional Convention in 1787, which received the Confederation
   Congress's permission to "amend the Articles of Confederation". All
   states except Rhode Island agreed to send delegates.

   The issue of how Congress was to be structured was one of the most
   divisive among the founders during the Convention. Edmund Randolph's
   Virginia Plan called for a bicameral Congress: the lower house would be
   "of the people", elected directly by the people of the United States
   and representing public opinion, and a more deliberative upper house
   that would represent the individual states, and would be less
   susceptible to variations of mass sentiment, would be elected by the
   lower house.

   The House is referred to as the lower house, with the Senate being the
   upper house, although the United States Constitution does not use that
   terminology. Both houses' approval is necessary for the passage of
   legislation. The Virginia Plan drew the support of delegates from large
   states such as Virginia, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania, as it called
   for representation based on population. The smaller states, however,
   favored the New Jersey Plan, which called for a unicameral Congress
   with equal representation for the states.

   Eventually, the Convention reached the Connecticut Compromise, or the
   Great Compromise, under which one house of Congress (the House of
   Representatives) would provide representation proportional to each
   state's population, whereas the other (the Senate) would provide equal
   representation amongst the states. The Constitution was ratified by the
   requisite number of states (nine out of the 13) in 1788, but its
   implementation was set for March 4, 1789. The House began work on April
   1, 1789, when it achieved a quorum for the first time.

   During the first half of the 19th century, the House was frequently in
   conflict with the Senate over regionally divisive issues, including
   slavery. The North was much more populous than the South, and therefore
   dominated the House of Representatives. However, the North held no such
   advantage in the Senate, where the equal representation of states
   prevailed.
   Historical graph of party control of the Senate and House as well as
   the Presidency^[5]

   Regional conflict was most pronounced over the issue of slavery. One
   example of a provision repeatedly supported by the House but blocked by
   the Senate was the Wilmot Proviso, which sought to ban slavery in the
   land gained during the Mexican-American War. Conflict over slavery and
   other issues persisted until the Civil War (1861–1865), which began
   soon after several southern states attempted to secede from the Union.
   The war culminated in the South's defeat and in the abolition of
   slavery. Because all southern senators except Andrew Johnson resigned
   their seats at the beginning of the war, the Senate did not have the
   balance of power between North and South during the war.

   The years of Reconstruction that followed witnessed large majorities
   for the Republican Party, which many Americans associated with the
   Union's victory in the Civil War and the ending of slavery. The
   Reconstruction period ended in about 1877; the ensuing era, known as
   the Gilded Age, was marked by sharp political divisions in the
   electorate. The Democratic and the Republican Party held majorities in
   the House at various times.

   The late 19th and early 20th centuries also saw a dramatic increase in
   the power of the Speaker of the House. The rise of the Speaker's
   influence began in the 1890s, during tenure of Republican Thomas
   Brackett Reed. "Czar Reed", as he was nicknamed, attempted to put into
   effect his view that "The best system is to have one party govern and
   the other party watch." The leadership structure of the House also
   developed during approximately the same period, with the positions of
   Majority Leader and Minority Leader being created in 1899. While the
   Minority Leader was the head of the minority party, the Majority Leader
   remained subordinate to the Speaker. The Speakership reached its zenith
   during the term of Republican Joseph Gurney Cannon, 1903 to 1911. The
   powers of the Speaker included chairmanship of the influential Rules
   Committee and the ability to appoint members of other House committees.
   These powers, however, were curtailed in the "Revolution of 1910"
   because of the efforts of Democrats and dissatisfied Republicans who
   opposed Cannon's arguably heavy-handed tactics.
   Republican Thomas Brackett Reed, occasionally ridiculed as "Czar Reed",
   was a U.S. Representative from Maine, and Speaker of the House from
   1889 to 1891 and from 1895 to 1899.

   The Democratic Party dominated the House of Representatives during the
   administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945), often
   winning over two-thirds of the seats. Both Democrats and Republicans
   were in power at various times during the next decade. The Democratic
   Party maintained control of the House from 1955 until 1995. In the
   mid-1970s, there were major reforms of the House, strengthening the
   power of sub-committees at the expense of committee chairs and allowing
   party leaders to nominate committee chairs. These actions were taken to
   undermine the seniority system, and to reduce the ability of a small
   number of senior members to obstruct legislation they did not favor.
   There was also a shift from the 1970s to greater control of the
   legislative program by the majority party; the power of party leaders
   (especially the Speaker) grew considerably.

   The Republicans took control of the House in 1995, under the leadership
   of Speaker Newt Gingrich. Gingrich attempted to pass a major
   legislative program, the Contract with America on which the House
   Republicans had been elected, and made major reforms of the House,
   notably reducing the tenure of committee chairs to three two-year
   terms. Many elements of the Contract did not pass Congress, were vetoed
   by President Bill Clinton, or were substantially altered in
   negotiations with Clinton. The Republicans held on to the House until
   2007, when the Democrats won control and Nancy Pelosi was subsequently
   elected by the House as the first female Speaker. The Republicans
   retook the House in 2011, the largest shift of power since the
   1930s.^[6]

Membership, qualifications and apportionment[edit]

Apportionment[edit]

   Further information: United States congressional apportionment
   All 435 voting seats of the current House shown grouped by state,
   largest to smallest.
   Population per U.S. Representative allocated to each of the 50 states
   and DC, ranked by population. Since DC (ranked 50) receives no seats in
   the House, its bar is absent.

   Under Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution, seats in the House of
   Representatives are apportioned among the states by population, as
   determined by the census conducted every ten years. Each state,
   however, is entitled to at least one Representative.

   The only constitutional rule relating to the size of the House states:
   "The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty
   Thousand."^[7] Congress regularly increased the size of the House to
   account for population growth until it fixed the number of voting House
   members at 435 in 1911.^[4] The number was temporarily increased to 437
   in 1959 upon the admission of Alaska and Hawaii (seating one
   representative from each of those states without changing existing
   apportionment), and returned to 435 four years later, after the
   reapportionment consequent to the 1960 census.

   The Constitution does not provide for the representation of the
   District of Columbia or of territories. The District of Columbia and
   the territories of American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands,
   and the U.S. Virgin Islands are represented by one non-voting delegate
   each. Puerto Rico elects a Resident Commissioner, but other than having
   a four-year term, the Resident Commissioner's role is identical to the
   delegates from the other territories. The five Delegates and Resident
   Commissioner may participate in debates; prior to 2011,^[8] they were
   also allowed to vote in committees and the Committee of the Whole when
   their votes would not be decisive.^[9]

Redistricting[edit]

   Main article: Redistricting

   States that are entitled to more than one Representative are divided
   into single-member districts. This has been a federal statutory
   requirement since 1967.^[10] Prior to that law, general ticket
   representation was used by some states.

   States typically redraw district boundaries after each census, though
   they may do so at other times, such as the 2003 Texas redistricting.
   Each state determines its own district boundaries, either through
   legislation or through non-partisan panels. "Malapportionment" is
   unconstitutional and districts must be approximately equal in
   population (see Wesberry v. Sanders). Federal courts have allowed state
   legislatures to redistrict as they please, allowing various forms of
   gerrymandering as long as the district is contiguous and of appropriate
   population size,^[11]^[12] but Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of
   1965 prohibits redistricting plans that are intended to, or have the
   effect of, discriminating against racial or language minority
   voters.^[13]

Qualifications[edit]

   Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution sets three qualifications for
   representatives. Each representative must: (1) be at least twenty-five
   years old; (2) have been a citizen of the United States for the past
   seven years; and (3) be (at the time of the election) an inhabitant of
   the state they represent. Members are not required to live in the
   district they represent, but they traditionally do.^[14] The age and
   citizenship qualifications for representatives are less than those for
   senators. The constitutional requirements of Article I, Section 2 for
   election to Congress are the maximum requirements that can be imposed
   on a candidate.^[15] Therefore, Article I, Section 5, which permits
   each House to be the judge of the qualifications of its own members
   does not permit either House to establish additional qualifications.
   Likewise a State could not establish additional qualifications.

   Disqualification: under the Fourteenth Amendment, a federal or state
   officer who takes the requisite oath to support the Constitution, but
   later engages in rebellion or aids the enemies of the United States, is
   disqualified from becoming a representative. This post–Civil War
   provision was intended to prevent those who sided with the Confederacy
   from serving. However, disqualified individuals may serve if they gain
   the consent of two-thirds of both houses of Congress.

Elections[edit]

   Elections for representatives are held in every even-numbered year, on
   Election Day the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. By
   law, Representatives must be elected from single-member districts by
   plurality voting. After a census is taken (in a year ending in 0), the
   year ending in 2 is the first year in which elections for U.S. House
   districts are based on that census (with the Congress based on those
   districts starting its term on the following Jan. 3).

   In most states, major party candidates for each district are nominated
   in partisan primary elections, typically held in spring to late summer.
   In some states, the Republican and Democratic parties choose their
   respective candidates for each district in their political conventions
   in spring or early summer, which often use unanimous voice votes to
   reflect either confidence in the incumbent or the result of bargaining
   in earlier private discussions. Exceptions can result in so-called
   floor fight—convention votes by delegates, with outcomes that can be
   hard to predict. Especially if a convention is closely divided, a
   losing candidate may contend further by meeting the conditions for a
   primary election.

   The courts generally do not consider ballot access rules for
   independent and third party candidates to be additional qualifications
   for holding office and there are no federal regulations regarding
   ballot access. As a result, the process to gain ballot access varies
   greatly from state to state, and, in the case of a third party may be
   affected by results of previous years' elections.

   In 1967, Federal law was changed to require that representatives be
   elected from single-member-districts,^[16] due to fear that, as a
   consequence of the recent Wesberry v. Sanders decision, courts would
   impose at-large plurality districts on states that did not redistrict
   to comply with the new mandates for districts roughly equal in
   population, and also to prevent attempts by southern states to use such
   voting systems to dilute the vote of racial minorities.^[17]

   Louisiana is unique in that it holds an all-party "primary election" on
   the general Election Day with a subsequent runoff election between the
   top two finishers (regardless of party) if no candidate received a
   majority in the primary. The states of Washington and California now
   use a similar (though not identical) system to that used by Louisiana.
   Seats vacated during a term are filled through special elections,
   unless the vacancy occurs closer to the next general election date than
   a pre-established deadline. The term of a member chosen in a special
   election usually begins the next day, or as soon as the results are
   certified.

Terms[edit]

   Representatives and Delegates serve for two-year terms, while the
   Resident Commissioner serves for four years. The Constitution permits
   the House to expel a member with a two-thirds vote. In the history of
   the United States, only five members have been expelled from the House;
   in 1861, three were removed for supporting the Confederate states'
   secession: John Bullock Clark (D-MO), John William Reid (D-MO), and
   Henry Cornelius Burnett (D-KY). Michael Myers (D-PA) was expelled after
   his criminal conviction for accepting bribes in 1980, and James
   Traficant (D-OH) was expelled in 2002 following his conviction for
   corruption.^[18] The House also has the power to formally censure or
   reprimand its members; censure or reprimand of a member requires only a
   simple majority, and does not remove that member from office.

Comparison to the Senate[edit]

   As a check on the regional, popular, and rapidly changing politics of
   the House, the Senate has several distinct powers. For example, the
   "advice and consent" powers (such as the power to approve treaties) are
   a sole Senate privilege.^[19] The House, however, has the exclusive
   power to initiate bills for raising revenue, to impeach officials, and
   to choose the President in the event of an Electoral College
   deadlock.^[20] The Senate and House are further differentiated by term
   lengths and the number of districts represented: the Senate has longer
   terms of six years, fewer members (currently one hundred, two for each
   state), and (in all but seven delegations) larger constituencies per
   member. The Senate is informally referred to as the "upper" house, and
   the House of Representatives as the "lower" house.

Salary and benefits[edit]

Salaries[edit]

   As of January 2010^[update], the annual salary of each Representative
   is $174,000.^[21] The Speaker of the House and the Majority and
   Minority Leaders earn more: $223,500 for the Speaker and $193,400 for
   their party leaders (the same as Senate leaders).^[22] A
   cost-of-living-adjustment (COLA) increase takes effect annually unless
   Congress votes to not accept it. Congress sets members' salaries;
   however, the Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution
   prohibits a change in salary (but not COLA^[23]) from taking effect
   until after the next election of the whole House. Representatives are
   eligible for retirement benefits after serving for five years.^[24]
   Outside pay is limited to 15% of congressional pay, and certain types
   of income involving a fiduciary responsibility or personal endorsement
   are prohibited.^[22]

Titles[edit]

   Representatives use the prefix "The Honorable" before their names. A
   member of the House is referred to as a "Representative",
   "Congressman", or "Congresswoman". While Senators are technically
   "Congressmen/Congresswomen", the two terms are generally used
   exclusively by Members of the House of Representatives.

Pension[edit]

   All members of Congress are automatically (without the option of
   withdrawal) enrolled in the Federal Employees' Retirement System, a
   pension system for civil servants. They become eligible to receive
   benefits after five years of service (three terms in the House). The
   FERS is composed of three elements:
    1. Social Security
    2. The FERS basic annuity, a monthly pension plan based on the number
       of years of service and the average of the three highest years of
       basic pay
    3. The Thrift Savings Plan, a 401k-like retirement account into which
       participants can deposit up to a maximum of $17,000 in 2012. Their
       employing agency matches employee contributions up to 5% of pay.

   Members of Congress may retire with full benefits at age 62 after five
   years of service, at age 50 after twenty years of service, and at any
   age after twenty-five years of service. They may retire with reduced
   benefits at ages 55 to 59 after five years of service, and age 50 after
   20 years of service. Depending on birth year, they may receive a
   reduced pension after ten years of service if they are between 55 years
   and 57 years of age.^[25]

Tax deductions[edit]

   Members of Congress are permitted to deduct up to $3,000 of living
   expenses per year incurred while living away from their district or
   home state.^[26]

Health and life insurance[edit]

   Members of Congress are eligible to participate in the Federal
   Employees Health Benefits Program and the Federal Employees Life
   Insurance Program.

Personnel, mail and office expenses[edit]

   House members are eligible for a Member's Representational Allowance
   (MRA) to support them in their official and representational duties to
   their district. The MRA is calculated based on three components: one
   for personnel, one for official office expenses and one for official or
   franked mail. The personnel allowance is the same for all members; the
   office and mail allowances vary based on the members' district's
   distance from Washington, D.C., the cost of office space in the
   member's district, and the number of non-business addresses in their
   district. These three components are used to calculate a single MRA
   which can be used to fund any expense - even though each component is
   calculated individually, the franking allowance can be used to pay for
   personnel expenses if the member so chooses. In 2011 this allowance
   averaged $1.4 million per member, and ranged from $1.35 to $1.67
   million.^[27]

   The Personnel allowance was $944,671 per member in 2010. Each member
   may employ no more than 18 permanent employees. Members' employees'
   salary is capped at $168,411 as of 2009.^[27]

Travel allowance[edit]

   Each member and one staffer can be paid for one round trip between
   their home in their congressional district and Washington, D.C. for
   organization caucuses.^[27]

Officers[edit]

Member officials[edit]

   The party with a majority of seats in the House is known as the
   majority party. The next-largest party is the minority party. The
   Speaker, committee chairs, and some other officials are generally from
   the majority party; they have counterparts (for instance, the "ranking
   members" of committees) in the minority party.
   Former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Majority Leader Steny Hoyer, and
   Education and Labor Committee Chairman George Miller confer with
   President Barack Obama at the Oval Office in 2009.

   The Constitution provides that the House may choose its own
   Speaker.^[28] Although not explicitly required by the Constitution,
   every Speaker has been a member of the House. The Constitution does not
   specify the duties and powers of the Speaker, which are instead
   regulated by the rules and customs of the House. Speakers have a role
   both as a leader of the House and the leader of their party (which need
   not be the majority party; theoretically, a member of the minority
   party could be elected as Speaker with the support of a fraction of
   members of the majority party). Under the Presidential Succession Act
   (1947), the Speaker is second in the line of presidential succession
   behind the Vice President.

   The Speaker is the presiding officer of the House but does not preside
   over every debate. Instead, he or she delegates the responsibility of
   presiding to other members in most cases. The presiding officer sits in
   a chair in the front of the House chamber. The powers of the presiding
   officer are extensive; one important power is that of controlling the
   order in which members of the House speak. No member may make a speech
   or a motion unless he or she has first been recognized by the presiding
   officer. Moreover, the presiding officer may rule on a "point of order"
   (a member's objection that a rule has been breached); the decision is
   subject to appeal to the whole House.

   Speakers serve as chairs of their party's steering committee, which is
   responsible for assigning party members to other House committees. The
   Speaker chooses the chairs of standing committees, appoints most of the
   members of the Rules Committee, appoints all members of conference
   committees, and determines which committees consider bills.

   Each party elects a floor leader, who is known as the Majority Leader
   or Minority Leader. The Minority Leader heads his or her party in the
   House, and the Majority Leader is his or her party's
   second-highest-ranking official, behind the Speaker. Party leaders
   decide what legislation members of their party should either support or
   oppose.

   Each party also elects a whip, who works to ensure that the party's
   members vote as the party leadership desires. The current majority whip
   in the House of Representatives is Kevin McCarthy, who is a member of
   the Republican Party. The current minority whip is Steny Hoyer, who is
   a member of the Democratic Party. The whip is supported by chief deputy
   whips.

   In the 112th Congress, the Democratic Party has an additional Assistant
   Minority Leader, Jim Clyburn, who ranks between the whips and the
   caucus/conference chair.

   After the whips, the next ranking official in the House party's
   leadership is the Party Conference Chair (styled as the Republican
   Conference Chair and Democratic Caucus Chair).

   After the Conference Chair, there are differences between each party's
   subsequent leadership ranks. After the Democratic Caucus Chair is the
   Campaign Committee Chair (Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee),
   then the co-chairs of the Steering Committee. For the Republicans it is
   the Chair of the House Republican Policy Committee, followed by the
   Campaign Committee Chairman (styled as the National Republican
   Congressional Committee).

   The chairs of House committees, particularly influential standing
   committees such as Appropriations, Ways and Means, and Rules, are
   powerful but not officially part of House leadership hierarchy. Until
   the post of Majority Leader was created, the Chair of Ways and Means
   was the de facto majority leader.

Leadership and partisanship[edit]

   Representatives are generally less independent of party leaders than
   senators, and usually vote as the leadership directs. Incentives to
   cooperate include the leadership's power to select committee chairs,
   determine committee assignments, and provide re-election support in the
   primary and general elections. As a result, the leadership plays a much
   greater role in the House than in the Senate, an example of why the
   atmosphere of the House is regarded by many as more partisan.

   When the Presidency and Senate are controlled by a different party from
   the one controlling the House, the Speaker can become the de facto
   "leader of the opposition". Some notable examples include Tip O'Neill
   in the 1980s, Newt Gingrich in the 1990s, and John Boehner in the
   2010s. Since the Speaker is a partisan officer with substantial power
   to control the business of the House, the position is often used for
   partisan advantage.

   In the instance when the Presidency and both Houses of Congress are
   controlled by one party, the Speaker normally takes a low profile and
   defers to the President. For that situation the House Minority Leader
   can play the role of a de facto "leader of the opposition", often more
   so than the Senate Minority Leader, due to the more partisan nature of
   the House and the greater role of leadership.

Non-member officials[edit]

   The House is also served by several officials who are not members. The
   House's chief officer is the Clerk, who maintains public records,
   prepares documents, and oversees junior officials, including pages. The
   Clerk also presides over the House at the beginning of each new
   Congress pending the election of a Speaker. Another officer is the
   Chief Administrative Officer, responsible for the day-to-day
   administrative support to the House of Representatives. This includes
   everything from payroll to foodservice.

   The position of Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) was created by the
   104th Congress following the 1994 mid-term elections, replacing the
   positions of Doorkeeper and Director of Non-Legislative and Financial
   Services (created by the previous congress to administer the
   non-partisan functions of the House). The CAO also assumed some of the
   responsibilities of the House Information Services, which previously
   had been controlled directly by the Committee on House Administration,
   then headed by Representative Charlie Rose of North Carolina, along
   with the House "Folding Room".

   The Chaplain leads the House in prayer at the opening of the day. There
   is also a Sergeant at Arms, who as the House's chief law enforcement
   officer maintains order and security on House premises. Finally,
   routine police work is handled by the United States Capitol Police,
   which is supervised by the Capitol Police Board, a body to which the
   Sergeant at Arms belongs.

Procedure[edit]

   Main article: Procedures of the United States House of Representatives

Daily procedures[edit]

   Question book-new.svg
   This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help
   improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (September 2009)

   Like the Senate, the House of Representatives meets in the United
   States Capitol in Washington, D.C. At one end of the chamber of the
   House is a rostrum from which the Speaker, Speaker Pro Tempore, or
   (when in the Committee of the Whole) the Chair presides. The lower tier
   of the rostrum is used by clerks and other officials. Members' seats
   are arranged in the chamber in a semicircular pattern and are divided
   by a wide central aisle. By tradition, Democrats sit on the right of
   the center aisle, while Republicans sit on the left, as viewed from the
   presiding officer's chair.^[29] Sittings are normally held on weekdays;
   meetings on Saturdays and Sundays are rare. Sittings of the House are
   generally open to the public; visitors must obtain a House Gallery pass
   from a congressional office. Sittings are broadcast live on television
   and streamed online by C-SPAN.

   The procedure of the House depends not only on the rules, but also on a
   variety of customs, precedents, and traditions. In many cases, the
   House waives some of its stricter rules (including time limits on
   debates) by unanimous consent. A member may block a unanimous consent
   agreement; in practice, objections are rare. The presiding officer
   enforces the rules of the House, and may warn members who deviate from
   them. The presiding officer uses a gavel to maintain order. The box in
   which legislation is placed to be considered by the House is called the
   hopper.

   In one of its first resolutions, the U.S. House of Representatives
   established the Office of the Sergeant at Arms. In an American
   tradition adopted from English custom in 1789 by the first Speaker of
   the House, Frederick Muhlenberg of Pennsylvania, the House of
   Representatives mace is used to open all sessions of the House. It is
   also used during the inaugural ceremonies for all Presidents of the
   United States. For daily sessions of the House, the sergeant at Arms
   carries the mace in front of the Speaker in procession to the rostrum.
   It is placed on a green marble pedestal to the Speaker's right. When
   the House is in committee, the mace is moved to a pedestal next to the
   desk of the Sergeant at Arms.

   The Constitution provides that a majority of the House constitutes a
   quorum to do business. Under the rules and customs of the House, a
   quorum is always assumed present unless a quorum call explicitly
   demonstrates otherwise. House rules prevent a member from making a
   point of order that a quorum is not present unless a question is being
   voted upon; the presiding officer will not accept a point of order of
   no quorum during general debate or when a question is not before the
   House.

   During debates, a member may speak only if called upon by the presiding
   officer. The presiding officer decides which members to recognize, and
   can therefore control the course of debate. All speeches must be
   addressed to the presiding officer, using the words "Mr. Speaker" or
   "Madam Speaker". Only the presiding officer may be directly addressed
   in speeches; other members must be referred to in the third person. In
   most cases, members do not refer to each other by name, but by state,
   using forms such as "the gentleman from Virginia", "the distinguished
   gentlewoman from California", or "my distinguished friend from
   Alabama". Unlike the practice in the Parliament of the United Kingdom,
   members refer to each other as friends regardless of whether they are
   members of the same party.

   There are 448 permanent seats on the House Floor and four tables, two
   on each side. These tables are occupied by members of the committee
   that have brought a bill to the floor for consideration and by the
   respective party leadership. Members address the House from microphones
   at any table or "the well," the area immediately in front of the
   rostrum.^[30]

Passage of legislation[edit]

   This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed. (July 2014)

   Per the constitution, the House determines the rules according to which
   it passes legislation. The rules are in principle open to change with
   each new Congress, but in practice each new session amends a standing
   set of rules built up over the history of the body in an early
   resolution published for public inspection.^[31] Before legislation
   reaches the floor of the House, the Rules Committee normally passes a
   rule to govern debate on that measure. For instance, the committee
   determines if amendments to the bill are permitted. An "open rule"
   permits all germane amendments, but a "closed rule" restricts or even
   prohibits amendment. Debate on a bill is generally restricted to one
   hour, equally divided between the majority and minority parties. Each
   side is led during the debate by a "floor manager", who allocates
   debate time to members who wish to speak. On contentious matters, many
   members may wish to speak; thus, a member may receive as little as one
   minute, or even thirty seconds, to make his/her point.

   When debate concludes, the motion in question is put to a vote. In many
   cases, the House votes by voice vote; the presiding officer puts the
   question, and members respond either "yea" (in favor of the motion) or
   "nay" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the
   result of the voice vote. A member may however challenge the presiding
   officer's assessment and "request the yeas and nays" or "request a
   recorded vote". The request may be granted only if it is seconded by
   one-fifth of the members present. In practice, however, members of
   congress second requests for recorded votes as a matter of courtesy.
   Some votes are always recorded, such as those on the annual budget.

   A recorded vote may be taken in one of three different ways. One is
   electronically. Members use a personal identification card to record
   their votes at 46 voting stations in the chamber. Votes are usually
   held in this way. A second mode of recorded vote is by teller. Members
   hand in colored cards to indicate their votes: green for "yea", red for
   "nay", and orange for "present" (i.e., to abstain). Teller votes are
   normally held only when electronic voting breaks down. Finally, the
   House may conduct a roll call vote. The Clerk reads the list of members
   of the House, each of whom announces their vote when their name is
   called. This procedure is only used rarely (such as for the election of
   a Speaker) because of the time consumed by calling over four hundred
   names.

   Voting traditionally lasts for fifteen minutes, but it may be extended
   if the leadership needs to "whip" more members into alignment. The 2003
   vote on the prescription drug benefit was open for three hours, from
   3:00 to 6:00 a.m., to receive four additional votes, three of which
   were necessary to pass the legislation. The 2005 vote on the Central
   American Free Trade Agreement was open for one hour, from 11:00 p.m. to
   midnight. An October 2005 vote on facilitating refinery construction
   was kept open for forty minutes.

   Presiding officers may vote like other members. They may not, however,
   vote twice in the event of a tie; rather, a tie vote defeats the
   motion.

Committees[edit]

   Main articles: United States congressional committee and List of United
   States House of Representatives committees

   The House uses committees and their subcommittees for a variety of
   purposes, including the review of bills and the oversight of the
   executive branch. The appointment of committee members is formally made
   by the whole House, but the choice of members is actually made by the
   political parties. Generally, each party honors the preferences of
   individual members, giving priority on the basis of seniority.
   Historically, membership on committees has been in rough proportion to
   the party's strength in the House as a whole, with two exceptions: on
   the Rules Committee, the majority party fills nine of the thirteen
   seats;^[32] and on the Ethics Committee, each party has an equal number
   of seats.^[33] However, when party control in the House is closely
   divided, extra seats on committees are sometimes allocated to the
   majority party. In the 109th Congress, for example, the Republicans
   controlled about 53% of the House as a whole, but had 54% of the
   Appropriations Committee members, 55% of the members on the Energy and
   Commerce Committee, 58% of the members on the Judiciary Committee, and
   69% of the members on the Rules Committee.

   The largest committee of the House is the Committee of the Whole,
   which, as its name suggests, consists of all members of the House. The
   Committee meets in the House chamber; it may consider and amend bills,
   but may not grant them final passage. Generally, the debate procedures
   of the Committee of the Whole are more flexible than those of the House
   itself. One advantage of the Committee of the Whole is its ability to
   include otherwise non-voting members of Congress.

   Most committee work is performed by twenty standing committees, each of
   which has jurisdiction over a specific set of issues, such as
   Agriculture or Foreign Affairs. Each standing committee considers,
   amends, and reports bills that fall under its jurisdiction. Committees
   have extensive powers with regard to bills; they may block legislation
   from reaching the floor of the House. Standing committees also oversee
   the departments and agencies of the executive branch. In discharging
   their duties, standing committees have the power to hold hearings and
   to subpoena witnesses and evidence.

   The House also has one permanent committee that is not a standing
   committee, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and from
   time to time may establish committees that are temporary and advisory
   in nature, such as the Select Committee on Energy Independence and
   Global Warming. This latter committee, created in the 110th Congress
   and reauthorized for the 111th, has no jurisdiction over legislation
   and must be chartered anew at the start of every Congress. The House
   also appoints members to serve on joint committees, which include
   members of the Senate and House. Some joint committees oversee
   independent government bodies; for instance, the Joint Committee on the
   Library oversees the Library of Congress. Other joint committees serve
   to make advisory reports; for example, there exists a Joint Committee
   on Taxation. Bills and nominees are not referred to joint committees.
   Hence, the power of joint committees is considerably lower than those
   of standing committees.

   Each House committee and subcommittee is led by a chairman (always a
   member of the majority party). From 1910 to the 1970s, committee chairs
   were powerful. Woodrow Wilson in his classic study,^[34] suggested:

     Power is nowhere concentrated; it is rather deliberately and of set
     policy scattered amongst many small chiefs. It is divided up, as it
     were, into forty-seven seigniories, in each of which a Standing
     Committee is the court-baron and its chairman lord-proprietor. These
     petty barons, some of them not a little powerful, but none of them
     within the reach of the full powers of rule, may at will exercise
     almost despotic sway within their own shires, and may sometimes
     threaten to convulse even the realm itself.

   From 1910 to 1975 committee and subcommittee chairmanship was
   determined purely by seniority; congressmembers sometimes had to wait
   30 years to get one, but their chairship was independent of party
   leadership. The rules were changed in 1975 to permit party caucuses to
   elect chairs, shifting power upward to the party leaders. In 1995,
   Republicans under Newt Gingrich set a limit of three two-year terms for
   committee chairs. The chair's powers are extensive; they control the
   committee/subcommittee agenda, and may prevent the committee from
   dealing with a bill. The senior member of the minority party is known
   as the Ranking Member. In some committees like Appropriations, partisan
   disputes are few.

Legislative functions[edit]

   Most bills may be introduced in either House of Congress. However, the
   Constitution provides that "All bills for raising Revenue shall
   originate in the House of Representatives". As a result of the
   Origination Clause, the Senate cannot initiate bills imposing taxes.
   This provision barring the Senate from introducing revenue bills is
   based on the practice of the British Parliament, in which only the
   House of Commons may originate such measures. Furthermore,
   Congressional tradition holds that the House of Representatives
   originates appropriation bills.

   Although it cannot originate revenue bills, the Senate retains the
   power to amend or reject them. Woodrow Wilson wrote the following about
   appropriations bills:^[35]

     [T]he constitutional prerogative of the House has been held to apply
     to all the general appropriations bills, and the Senate's right to
     amend these has been allowed the widest possible scope. The upper
     house may add to them what it pleases; may go altogether outside of
     their original provisions and tack to them entirely new features of
     legislation, altering not only the amounts but even the objects of
     expenditure, and making out of the materials sent them by the
     popular chamber measures of an almost totally new character.

   The approval of the Senate and the House of Representatives is required
   for a bill to become law. Both Houses must pass the same version of the
   bill; if there are differences, they may be resolved by a conference
   committee, which includes members of both bodies. For the stages
   through which bills pass in the Senate, see Act of Congress.

   The President may veto a bill passed by the House and Senate. If he
   does, the bill does not become law unless a two-thirds supermajority in
   each chamber votes to override the veto.

Checks and balances[edit]

   The Constitution provides that the Senate's "advice and consent" is
   necessary for the President to make appointments and to ratify
   treaties. Thus, with its potential to frustrate Presidential
   appointments, the Senate is more powerful than the House.

   The Constitution empowers the House of Representatives to impeach
   federal officials for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and
   Misdemeanors" and empowers the Senate to try such impeachments. The
   House may approve "articles of impeachment" by a simple majority vote;
   however, a two-thirds vote is required for conviction in the Senate. A
   convicted official is automatically removed from office; in addition,
   the Senate may stipulate that the defendant be banned from holding
   future office. No further punishment is permitted during the
   impeachment proceedings; however, the party may face criminal penalties
   in a normal court of law.

   In the history of the United States, the House of Representatives has
   impeached sixteen officials, of whom seven were convicted. (Another,
   Richard Nixon, resigned after the House Judiciary Committee passed
   articles of impeachment but before a formal impeachment vote by the
   full House.) Only two Presidents of the United States have ever been
   impeached: Andrew Johnson in 1868 and Bill Clinton in 1998. Both trials
   ended in acquittal; in Johnson's case, the Senate fell one vote short
   of the two-thirds majority required for conviction.

   Under the Twelfth Amendment, the House has the power to elect the
   President if no presidential candidate receives a majority of votes in
   the Electoral College. The Twelfth Amendment requires the House to
   choose from the three candidates with the highest numbers of electoral
   votes. The Constitution provides that "the votes shall be taken by
   states, the representation from each state having one vote." Electoral
   College deadlocks are rare; in the history of the United States, the
   House has only had to break a deadlock twice. In 1800, it elected
   Thomas Jefferson over Aaron Burr; in 1824, it elected John Quincy Adams
   over Andrew Jackson and William H. Crawford. The Senate elects the Vice
   President if the Electoral College deadlocks.

Latest election results and current party standings[edit]

   See also: United States House of Representatives elections, 2012 and
   113th United States Congress

Current standing[edit]

     Affiliation    Members  Delegates
                            / Resident
                            Commissioner
                            (non-voting)    Number of
                                         state majorities
   Republican Party   234        0              32
   Democratic Party   199        6              16
   vacant              2         0           (2 tied)
        Total         435        6

End of previous Congress[edit]

     Affiliation    Members  Delegates
                            / Resident
                            Commissioner
                            (non-voting)    Number of
                                         state majorities
   Republican Party   241        0              33
   Democratic Party   191        6              16
   vacant              3         0
        Total         435        6

See also[edit]

   There are also individual Houses of Representatives for most states in
   the US, sometimes called by a different name; see List of United States
   state legislatures.
     * Bibliography of U.S. congressional memoirs (U. S. representatives)
     * Self-executing rule
     * Standing Rules of the United States House of Representatives
     * Suspension of the rules in the United States Congress
     * United States Presidents and control of Congress
     * Women in the United States House of Representatives

Membership lists[edit]

     * House Trade Working Group
     * List of freshman class members of the 113th United States Congress
     * List of current members of the United States House of
       Representatives by age and generation

113th Congress[edit]

   The 113th United States Congress will run from January 3, 2013 to
   January 3, 2015.
     * Proposed bills of the 113th United States Congress
     * Acts of the 113th United States Congress

References[edit]

    1. ^ Section 7 of Article 1 of the Constitution
    2. ^ Section 2 of Article 1
    3. ^ Article 1, Section 2, and in the 12th Amendment
    4. ^ ^a ^b See Public Law 62-5 of 1911, though Congress has the
       authority to change that number. The Reapportionment Act of 1929
       capped the size of the House at 435.
    5. ^ "Party In Power - Congress and Presidency - A Visual Guide To The
       Balance of Power In Congress, 1945–2008". Uspolitics.about.com.
       Retrieved September 17, 2012.
    6. ^ Neuman, Scott (November 3, 2010). "Obama, GOP Grapple With power
       shift". NPR. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
    7. ^ Article I, Section 2.
    8. ^ "New House Majority Introduces Rules Changes". NPR. January 5,
       2011. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
    9. ^ See H.Res. 78, passed January 24, 2007. On April 19, 2007, the
       House of Representatives passed the DC House Voting Rights Act of
       2007, a bill "to provide for the treatment of the District of
       Columbia as a Congressional district for purposes of representation
       in the House of Representatives, and for other purposes" by a vote
       of 241–177. That bill proposes to increase the House membership by
       two, making 437 members, by converting the District of Columbia
       delegate into a member, and (until the 2010 census) grant one
       membership to Utah, which is the state next in line to receive an
       additional district based on its population after the 2000 Census.
       The bill was under consideration in the U.S. Senate during the 2007
       session.
   10. ^ 2 U.S.C. § 2c "no district to elect more than one Representative"
   11. ^ Bazelon, Emily (November 9, 2012). "The Supreme Court may gut the
       Voting Rights Act and make gerrymandering much worse". Slate.
   12. ^ Eaton, Whitney M. (May 2006). "Where Do We Draw the Line?
       Partisan Gerrymandering and the State of Texas". University of
       Richmond Law Review.
   13. ^ "Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act". Civil Rights Division
       Voting FAQ. US Dept. of Justice. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
   14. ^ "Qualifications of Members of Congress". Onecle Inc. Retrieved
       January 26, 2013.
   15. ^ See Powell v. McCormack, a U.S. Supreme Court case from 1969
   16. ^ 2 U.S.C. § 2c
   17. ^ The 1967 Single-Member District Mandate
   18. ^ "Expulsion, Censure, Reprimand, and Fine: Legislative Discipline
       in the House of Representatives" (PDF). Retrieved August 23,
       2010. ^[dead link]
   19. ^ Senate Legislative Process, U.S. Senate . Retrieved 2010-02-03.
   20. ^ The Legislative Branch, The White House . Retrieved 2010-02-03.
   21. ^ "Salaries and Benefits of U.S. Congress Members". Retrieved April
       17, 2009.
   22. ^ ^a ^b Brudnick, Ida A. (January 4, 2012). "Congressional Salaries
       and Allowances". CRS Report for Congress. United States House of
       Representatives. Retrieved December 2, 2012.
   23. ^ Schaffer v. Clinton
   24. ^ Brudnick, Ida A. (June 28, 2011). "Congressional Salaries and
       Allowances". Retrieved November 22, 2011.
   25. ^ Congressional Research Service. "Retirement Benefits for Members
       of Congress". CRS Report for Congress. United States Senate.
       Retrieved September 21, 2012.
   26. ^ Congressional Research Service. "Congressional Salaries and
       Allowances". CRS Report for Congress. United States House of
       Representatives. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
   27. ^ ^a ^b ^c Brudnick, Ida. "Congressional Salaries and Allowances".
       Congressional Research Service Report for Congress. United States
       House of Representatives. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
   28. ^ Article I, Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law
       School . Retrieved 2010-02-03.
   29. ^ "What's in the House Chamber". Retrieved 2013-11-21.
   30. ^ "Office of the Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives The
       House Floor". Clerk.house.gov. Retrieved August 23, 2010.
   31. ^ "The House Explained". House.gov. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
   32. ^ http://rules.house.gov/110/comm_history.html^[dead link]
   33. ^ "Rules - Committee on Standards of Official Conduct" (PDF).
       Retrieved August 23, 2010.
   34. ^ Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics (1885,
       Boston: Houghton, Mifflin)
   35. ^ Wilson, Woodrow. Congressional Government: A Study in American
       Politics, pp. 155–156 (Transaction Publishers 2002) (quotation
       marks omitted).

Surveys[edit]

     * Currie, James T. The United States House of Representatives.
       Krieger, 1988.
     * MacNeil, Neil (1963). Forge of Democracy: The House of
       Representatives. New York: D. McKay.
     * Peters, Ronald M., Jr (1997). The American Speakership: The Office
       in Historical Perspective (2nd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
       University Press. ISBN 0-8018-5758-9.
     * Polsby, Nelson W. (2004). How Congress Evolves: Social Bases of
       Institutional Change. New York: Oxford University Press.
       ISBN 0-19-516195-5.
     * Poole, Keith T.; Howard Rosenthal (1997). Congress: A
       Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting. New York: Oxford
       University Press. ISBN 0-19-514242-X.
     * Remini, Robert V. (2006). The House: The History of the House of
       Representatives. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-088434-7.
     * Sinclair, Barbara (1983). Majority Leadership in the U.S. House.
       Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-2933-X.
     * Julian E. Zelizer, ed. (2004). The American Congress: The Building
       of Democracy. New York: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-17906-2.

Notes[edit]

     * Abramowitz, Alan I.; Saunders, Kyle L. (1998). Ideological
       Realignment in the US Electorate. 60(3). Journal of Politics.
       pp. 634–652.
     * Adler, E. Scott (2002). Why Congressional Reforms Fail: Reelection
       and the House Committee System. . Univ. of Chicago Press.
     * Albert, Carl; Goble, Danney (1990). Little Giant: The Life and
       Times of Speaker Carl Albert. Univ. of Oklahoma Press. , Speaker in
       the 1970s
     * Barone, Michael; Ujifusa,, Grant (2005). The Almanac of American
       Politics 2006: The Senators, the Representatives and the Governors:
       Their Records and Election Results, Their States and Districts. ,
       Published every two years since 1975; enormous detail on every
       state and district and member.
     * Barry, John M. (1989). The Ambition and the Power: The Fall of Jim
       Wright. A True Story of Washington. Viking. , Speaker in the 1980s
     * Berard, Stanley P. (2001). Southern Democrats in the U.S. House of
       Representatives. Univ. of Oklahoma Press.
     * Berman, Daniel M. (1964). In Congress Assembled: The Legislative
       Process in the National Government. London: The Macmillan
       Company. ,
     * Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–2005.
       Washington: Government Printing Office. 2005. , Prepared by the
       Office of the Clerk, Office of History and Preservation, United
       States House of Representatives. Contains biographical entries for
       every Member of Congress. Also online at Biographical Directory.
     * Brady, David W. (1973). Congressional Voting in a Partisan Era: A
       Study of the McKinley Houses and a Comparison to the Modern House
       of Representatives. Univ. Press of Kansas.
     * Brady, David W.; McCubbins, Mathew D. (2002). Party, Process, and
       Political Change in Congress: New Perspectives on the History of
       Congress.
     * Congressional Quarterly, massive, highly detailed summary of
       Congressional activity, and major executive and judicial decisions;
       based on Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report and the annual CQ
       almanac.
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1945–1964
            (1965)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1965–1968
            (1969)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1969–1972
            (1973)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1973–1976
            (1977)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1977–1980
            (1981)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1981–1984
            (1985)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1985–1988
            (1989)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1989–1992
            (1993)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1993–1996
            (1998)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1997–2001
            (2002)
          + Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 2001–2004: A
            Review of Government and Politics: 107th and 108th Congresses
            (2005)
     * Congressional Quarterly's Guide to Congress (5th ed.). Washington,
       D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press. 2000. ,
     * Cooper, Joseph (1970). The Origins of the Standing Committees and
       the Development of the Modern House. Rice Univ. Press.
     * Cox, Gary W.; McCubbins, Mathew D. (1993). Legislative Leviathan:
       Party Government in the House. Univ. of California Press.
     * DeGregorio, Christine A. (1997). Networks of Champions: Leadership,
       Access, and Advocacy in the U.S. House of Representatives. Univ. of
       Michigan Press.
     * Dierenfield, Bruce J. (1987). Keeper of the Rules: Congressman
       Howard W. Smith of Virginia. Univ. Press of Virginia. , leader of
       Conservative coalition 1940–66
     * Farrell, John A. (2001). Tip O'Neill and the Democratic Century.
       Little, Brown. , Democratic Speaker in the 1980s
     * Gertzog, Irwin J. (1984). Congressional Women: Their Recruitment,
       Treatment, and Behavior. Praeger.
     * Hardeman, D. B.; Bacon, Donald C. (1987). Rayburn: A Biography.
       Texas Monthly Press.
     * Hatzenbuehler, Ronald L. (1972). "Party Unity and the Decision for
       War in the House of Representatives in 1812". William and Mary
       Quarterly 29: 367–90.
     * Hechler, Ken (1980). Toward the Endless Frontier: History of the
       Committee on Science and Technology, 1959–79. Washington:
       Government Printing Office.
     * Henig, Gerald S. (1973). Henry Winter Davis: Antebellum and Civil
       War Congressman from Maryland. , Radical leader in Civil War era
     * Hibbing, John R. (1991). Congressional Careers: Contours of Life in
       the U.S. House of Representatives. Univ. of North Carolina Press.
     * Jacobs, John (1995). A Rage for Justice: The Passion and Politics
       of Phillip Burton. Univ. of California Press. , leader of liberal
       Democrats in the 1970s
     * Jacobson, Gary C. (1990). The Electoral Origins of Divided
       Government: Competition in U.S. House Elections, 1946–1988.
       Westview.
     * Kiewiet, D. Roderick; McCubbins, Mathew D. (1991). The Logic of
       Delegation: Congressional Parties and the Appropriations Process.
       Univ. of Chicago Press.
     * Klingman, Peter D. (1976). Josiah Walls: Florida's Black
       Congressman of Reconstruction. Univ. Press of Florida.
     * Grant de Pauw, Linda; Bickford, Charlene Bangs; Bowling, Kenneth
       R., eds. (1992–2006). Documentary History of the First Federal
       Congress of the United States of America, March 4, 1789-March 3,
       1791. , 14 volumes of primary documents
     * Lowitt, Richard (1963). George W. Norris: The Making of a
       Progressive, 1861–1912 1. Syracuse Univ. Press. , leader of
       Republican insurgents in 1910
     * Margulies, Herbert F. (1996). Reconciliation and Revival: James R.
       Mann and the House Republicans in the Wilson Era. . Greenwood.
     * Merriner, James L. (1999). Mr. Chairman: Power in Dan
       Rostenkowski's America. Southern Illinois Univ. Press.
     * Patterson, James (1967). Congressional Conservatism and the New
       Deal: The Growth of the Conservative Coalition in Congress,
       1933–39.
     * Price, David E. (1992). The Congressional Experience: A View from
       the Hill. Westview. , Political scientist who served in House.
     * Remini first=Robert V. (1992). Henry Clay: Statesman for the
       Union. . Speaker for most of 1811–1825
     * Rohde, David W. (1991). Parties and Leaders in the Postreform
       House. Univ. of Chicago Press.
     * Rohde, David W.; Shepsle, Kenneth A. (1987). "Leaders and Followers
       in the House of Representatives: Reflections on Woodrow Wilson's
       Congressional Government". Congress & the Presidency 14.
     * Schickler, Eric (2001). Disjointed Pluralism: Institutional
       Innovation and the Development of the U.S. Congress.
     * Schooley, C. Herschel (1977). Missouri's Cannon in the House.
       Marceline, Missouri: Walsworth. , Chaired Appropriations in the
       1960s
     * Shelley II, Mack C. (1983). The Permanent Majority: The
       Conservative Coalition in the United States Congress.
     * Sinclair, Barbara (1982). Congressional Realignment, 1925–1978.
       Univ. of Texas Press.
     * Sinclair, Barbara (1995). Legislators, Leaders, and Lawmaking: The
       U.S. House of Representatives in the Postreform Era. Johns Hopkins
       Univ. Press.
     * Steinberg, Alfred (1975). Sam Rayburn: A Biography. Hawthorn. ,
       popular biography
     * Stewart, Charles H., III (1989). Budget Reform Politics: The Design
       of the Appropriations Process in the House of Representatives,
       1865–1921. Cambridge Univ. Press.
     * Story, Joseph (1891). Commentaries on the Constitution of the
       United States (2 vol.). Boston: Brown & Little.
     * Strahan, Randall; Moscardelli, Vincent G.; Haspel (2000). "The Clay
       Speakership Revisited". Polity. 32(4): 561–593. , uses roll call
       analysis
     * Strahan, Randall (1990). New Ways and Means: Reform and Change in a
       Congressional Committee. Univ. of North Carolina Press.
     * Trefousse, Hans L. (1997). Thaddeus Stevens: Nineteenth-Century
       Egalitarian. , majority leader in the 1860s
     * VanBeek, Stephen D. (1995). Post-Passage Politics: Bicameral
       Resolution in Congress. Univ. of Pittsburgh Press.
     * Waller, Robert A. (1977). Rainey of Illinois: A Political
       Biography, 1903–34. Univ. of Illinois Press. , Democratic Speaker
       1932–1934
     * Wilson, Woodrow (1885). Congressional Government. New York:
       Houghton Mifflin. ,
     * Zelizer, Julian E. (2006). On Capitol Hill : The Struggle to Reform
       Congress and its Consequences, 1948–2000.

External links[edit]

   Listen to this article (info/dl)
   Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any
   supported player.
   You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your
   browser.

   This audio file was created from a revision of the "United States House
   of Representatives" article dated August 4, 2006, and does not reflect
   subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
   More spoken articles
   Sound-icon.svg
     * United States House of Representatives
          + Clerk of the House of Representatives
          + Chief Administrative Office of the House
          + Office of the Majority Leader
          + Office of the Speaker of the House
          + Kids in the House Educational site
          + Official list of current members
          + Rules of the House
     * Legislative information and archives for US House and Senate, via
       THOMAS
     * Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774 to
       Present
     * A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787–1825
     * Complete Downloadable List of U.S. Representative Contact
       Information, via AggData LLC
     * United States House of Representatives collected news and
       commentary at The Washington Post


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Congress
     * House of Representatives
     * Senate
     * 113th Congress
     * Lists of congressional lists



   Members and leaders

    Members

              Current
                        * By length of service
                        * Freshmen
                        * Youngest members
                        * Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico
                        * Delegates
                        * Longest-serving members ever

              Senate
                        * Current
                             + by seniority
                             + by age
                        * Dean of the Senate
                        * Former senators
                             + Living
                        * Oldest
                        * Earliest serving
                        * Earliest living
                        * Expelled or censured
                        * Classes
                        * Born outside the U.S.

               House
                        * Current
                             + by seniority
                             + by age
                        * Dean of the House
                        * Former representatives
                             + Living
                        * Oldest
                             + Living
                        * Earliest serving
                        * Expelled, censured, and reprimanded
                        * Deaths by year

    Leaders

              Senate
                       * President (list)
                       * President pro tempore
                       * Majority and minority leaders
                       * Assistant party leaders
                       * Democratic Caucus (Chair
                       * Secretary
                       * Policy Committee Chair)
                       * Republican Conference (Chair
                       * Vice-Chair
                       * Policy Committee Chair)

              House
                       * Speaker
                       * Leaders
                       * Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group
                       * Democratic Caucus
                       * Republican Conference

   Districts
                * List
                * Apportionment

   Caucuses,
   women and
   minorities
                * African American members
                * Asian Pacific American members
                * Congressional caucus
                * Hispanic and Latino members
                * LGBT members
                * Women in the House
                * Women in the Senate


   Offices, employees, services, and the Capitol Complex

     Legislative
   offices
                     * Congressional staff
                     * Government Accountability Office (Comptroller General)
                     * Architect of the Capitol
                     * Capitol Police (Capitol Police Board)
                     * Capitol Guide Service (Capitol Guide Board)
                     * Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
                     * Compliance
                     * Library of Congress
                     * Government Printing Office (GPO)
                     * Technology Assessment

       Offices

                   Senate
                            * Library
                            * Curator
                            * Historical
                            * Pages

                   House
                            * Congressional Ethics
                            * Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Operations
                            * Interparliamentary Affairs
                            * Law Revision Counsel

      Employees

                   Senate
                            * Secretary
                            * Chaplain
                            * Curator
                            * Historian
                            * Librarian
                            * Parliamentarian
                            * Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper

                   House
                            * Chaplain
                            * Chief Administrative Officer
                            * Clerk
                            * Doorkeeper
                            * Floor Operations
                            * Floor Services Chief
                            * Historian
                            * Pages (Page Board)
                            * Parliamentarian
                            * Postmaster
                            * Reading Clerk
                            * Sergeant at Arms

     Library of
   Congress
                     * Congressional Research Service (reports)
                     * Copyright Office (Register of Copyrights)
                     * Law Library
                     * Poet Laureate
                     * THOMAS
                     * Adams Building
                     * Jefferson Building
                     * Madison Building

     Government
   Printing Office
                     * Public Printer
                     * Congressional Record
                     * Official Congressional Directory
                     * Serial Set
                     * Statutes at Large
                     * United States Code

       Capitol
                     * Crypt
                     * Dome
                     * Rotunda
                     * Statuary Hall
                     * Visitor Center
                     * The Apotheosis of Washington
                     * Statue of Freedom

       Office
   buildings

                   Senate
                            * Dirksen
                            * Hart
                            * Russell

                   House
                            * Building Commission
                            * Cannon
                            * Ford
                            * Longworth
                            * O'Neill
                            * Rayburn

        Other
   facilities
                     * Botanic Garden
                     * Health and Fitness Facility
                     * House Recording Studio
                     * Old Senate Chamber
                     * Old Supreme Court Chamber
                     * Power Plant
                     * Webster Page Residence
                     * Subway


   Powers, privileges, procedure, committees, history, and media

       Powers
                     * Article I
                     * Copyright
                     * Commerce (Dormant)
                     * Contempt of Congress
                     * Declaration of war
                     * Impeachment
                     * Naturalization
                     * "Necessary and Proper"
                     * Power of enforcement
                     * Taxing/spending

   Privileges and
   benefits
                     * Salaries
                     * Franking
                     * Immunity

      Procedure
                     * Act of Congress (list)
                     * Appropriation bill
                     * Budget resolution
                     * Closed sessions (House)
                     * Closed sessions (Senate)
                     * Cloture
                     * Concurrent resolution
                     * Continuing resolution
                     * Dear colleague letter
                     * Discharge petition
                     * Engrossed bill
                     * Enrolled bill
                     * Expulsion
                     * Joint resolution
                     * Joint session (list)
                     * Lame duck session
                     * Majority of the majority
                     * Procedures (House)
                     * Reconciliation
                     * Rider
                     * Saxbe fix
                     * Sponsorship
                     * Suspension of the rules
                     * Unanimous consent
                     * Veto override

   Senate-specific
                     * Advice and consent
                     * Classes
                     * Executive communication
                     * Executive session
                     * Filibuster
                     * Jefferson's Manual
                     * Journal
                     * Nuclear option
                     * Presiding Officer
                     * Recess appointment
                     * Riddick's Senate Procedure
                     * Secret hold
                     * Senatorial courtesy
                     * Seniority
                     * Standing Rules
                     * Tie-breaking votes
                     * Traditions
                     * Treaty Clause

     Committees
                     * Chairman and ranking member
                     * Of the Whole
                     * Conference
                     * Discharge petition
                     * Hearings
                     * Markup
                     * Oversight
                     * Joint
                     * List (House)
                     * List (Senate)
                     * Select and special
                     * Standing
                     * Subcommittees
                     * Special

        Items
                     * Gavels
                     * Mace of the House

       History
                     * Divided government
                     * House
                     * Gerrymandering
                     * Party control
                     * Senate
                     * Senate election disputes

        Media
                     * C-SPAN
                     * Congressional Quarterly
                     * The Hill
                     * Politico
                     * Roll Call

   Websites
          House of Representatives
          Senate


                    * v
     * t
     * e

   Legislatures of the United States
   United States Congress
                            * United States House of Representatives
                            * United States Senate

     State legislatures
                            * Alabama (H, S)
                            * Alaska (H, S)
                            * Arizona (H, S)
                            * Arkansas (H, S)
                            * California (A, S)
                            * Colorado (H, S)
                            * Connecticut (H, S)
                            * Delaware (H, S)
                            * Florida (H, S)
                            * Georgia (H, S)
                            * Hawaii (H, S)
                            * Idaho (H, S)
                            * Illinois (H, S)
                            * Indiana (H, S)
                            * Iowa (H, S)
                            * Kansas (H, S)
                            * Kentucky (H, S)
                            * Louisiana (H, S)
                            * Maine (H, S)
                            * Maryland (H, S)
                            * Massachusetts (H, S)
                            * Michigan (H, S)
                            * Minnesota (H, S)
                            * Mississippi (H, S)
                            * Missouri (H, S)
                            * Montana (H, S)
                            * Nebraska
                            * Nevada (A, S)
                            * New Hampshire (H, S)
                            * New Jersey (GA, S)
                            * New Mexico (H, S)
                            * New York (A, S)
                            * North Carolina (H, S)
                            * North Dakota (H, S)
                            * Ohio (H, S)
                            * Oklahoma (H, S)
                            * Oregon (H, S)
                            * Pennsylvania (H, S)
                            * Rhode Island (H, S)
                            * South Carolina (H, S)
                            * South Dakota (H, S)
                            * Tennessee (H, S)
                            * Texas (H, S)
                            * Utah (H, S)
                            * Vermont (H, S)
                            * Virginia (H, S)
                            * Washington (H, S)
                            * West Virginia (H, S)
                            * Wisconsin (A, S)
                            * Wyoming (H, S)

     Other legislatures
                            * District of Columbia
                            * American Samoa (H, S)
                            * Guam
                            * Northern Mariana Islands (H, S)
                            * Puerto Rico (H, S)
                            * U.S. Virgin Islands


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject


                 * v
     * t
     * e

   Lower houses of national legislatures
   Lower houses

                   Federal
                               * Argentina
                               * Australia
                               * Austria
                               * Belgium
                               * Bosnia and Herzegovina
                               * Brazil
                               * Canada
                               * Ethiopia
                               * Germany
                               * India
                               * Malaysia
                               * Mexico
                               * Nigeria
                               * Pakistan
                               * Russia
                               * South Sudan
                               * Sudan
                               * Switzerland
                               * United States

                   Unitary
                               * Afghanistan
                               * Algeria
                               * Antigua and Barbuda
                               * The Bahamas
                               * Bahrain
                               * Barbados
                               * Belarus
                               * Belize
                               * Bhutan
                               * Bolivia
                               * Burma
                               * Burundi
                               * Cambodia
                               * Cameroon
                               * Chile
                               * Colombia
                               * Democratic Republic of the Congo
                               * Republic of the Congo
                               * Czech Republic
                               * Dominican Republic
                               * Equatorial Guinea
                               * Fiji
                               * France
                               * Gabon
                               * Grenada
                               * Haiti
                               * Indonesia
                               * Ireland
                               * Italy
                               * Jamaica
                               * Japan
                               * Jordan
                               * Kazakhstan
                               * Kenya
                               * Lesotho
                               * Liberia
                               * Madagascar
                               * Mauritania
                               * Morocco
                               * Namibia
                               * Netherlands
                               * Oman
                               * Palau
                               * Paraguay
                               * Philippines
                               * Poland
                               * Romania
                               * Rwanda
                               * Saint Lucia
                               * Slovenia
                               * Somalia
                               * South Africa
                               * Spain
                               * Swaziland
                               * Tajikistan
                               * Thailand
                               * Trinidad and Tobago
                               * United Kingdom
                               * Uruguay
                               * Uzbekistan
                               * Zimbabwe

                Non-sovereign
                states
                               * American Samoa
                               * Bermuda
                               * Isle of Man
                               * Northern Mariana Islands
                               * Puerto Rico

                Non-UN states
                               * Somaliland

     Related
                  * Bicameralism
                  * Unicameralism
                  * List of legislatures by country

   Coordinates: 38°53′20″N 77°0′32″W﻿ / ﻿38.88889°N 77.00889°W﻿ /
   38.88889; -77.00889
   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_House_of_Repre
   sentatives&oldid=624050570"
   Categories:
     * National lower houses
     * United States House of Representatives

   Hidden categories:
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from July 2011
     * Articles with dead external links from March 2011
     * Use mdy dates from October 2013
     * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2010
     * All articles containing potentially dated statements
     * Articles needing additional references from September 2009
     * All articles needing additional references
     * Articles needing additional references from July 2014
     * Spoken articles
     * Articles with hAudio microformats
     * Coordinates on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Azərbaycanca
     * Беларуская
     * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
     * Български
     * Brezhoneg
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Cymraeg
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Eesti
     * Ελληνικά
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Føroyskt
     * Français
     * Frysk
     * Gaeilge
     * 한국어
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Ido
     * Ilokano
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Íslenska
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * ქართული
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * मराठी
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Occitan
     * Plattdüütsch
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * Tagalog
     * தமிழ்
     * Татарча/tatarça
     * ไทย
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 粵語
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 3 September 2014 at 18:55.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
