   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

United States Navy

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   "USN" redirects here. For other uses, see USN (disambiguation).
   United States Navy
   US-DeptOfNavy-Seal.svg
   United States Navy portal
   Active 13 October 1775 – present^[1]^[2]
   (238 years, 11 months)
   Country  United States of America
   Allegiance Constitution of the United States
   Type Navy
   Size 323,561 active duty personnel^[3]
   109,117 reserve personnel^[3]
   291 ships^[3]
   3,700+ aircraft
   10 aircraft carriers
   9 amphibious assault ships
   10 amphibious transport docks
   12 dock landing ships
   22 cruisers
   62 destroyers
   11 frigates
   4 littoral combat ships
   72 submarines
   Part of U.S. Department of the Navy
   Headquarters The Pentagon
   Arlington County, Virginia, U.S.
   Motto "Non sibi sed patriae" (Latin: "Not for self but for country")
   (unofficial)^[4]
   Colors Blue, Gold
   March "Anchors Aweigh" About this sound  Play (help·info)
   Engagements
   List
     * American Revolutionary War
       Quasi-War
       First Barbary War
       War of 1812
       Second Barbary War
       West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations
       Seminole Wars
       African Anti-Slavery Operations
       Aegean Sea Anti-Piracy Operations
       First Sumatran expedition
       United States exploration expedition
       Patriot War
       Second Sumatran expedition
       Capture of Monterey
       Mexican-American War
       Bombardment of Greytown
       Battle of Ty-ho Bay
       First Fiji expedition
       Second Opium War
       Second Fiji expedition
       Reform War
       Paraguay expedition
       American Civil War
       Bombardment of Qui Nhon
       Battle of Shimonoseki Straits
       Formosa expedition
       United States expedition to Korea
       Brazilian Naval Revolts
       Kingdom of Hawaii overthrowal
       Second Samoan Civil War
       Banana Wars
          + Spanish-American War
          + Occupation of Nicaragua
          + Occupation of Haiti
          + Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916)
       Philippine-American War
       Boxer Rebellion
       World War I
       World War II
       Korean War
       1958 Lebanon crisis
       Vietnam War
       Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965)
       Iranian Hostage Rescue
       Multinational Force in Lebanon
       Invasion of Grenada
       Bombing of Libya (1986)
       Tanker War
          + Earnest Will
          + Prime Chance
          + Eager Glacier
          + Nimble Archer
          + Praying Mantis
       Invasion of Panama
       Persian Gulf War
       Iraqi no-fly zones
       Somali Civil War
       Bosnian War
       Kosovo War
       International Force for East Timor
       Operation Enduring Freedom
          + Afghanistan
          + Philippines
          + Horn of Africa
          + Pankisi Gorge
          + Trans Sahara
          + Caribbean and Central America
       Iraq War
       Operation Odyssey Dawn
       2014 Iraq intervention

   Decorations Streamer PUC Navy.PNG
   Presidential Unit Citation
   Navy Unit Commendation streamer.png
   Navy Unit Commendation
   Meritorious Unit Commendation (Navy-Marine) Streamer.jpg
   Meritorious Unit Commendation
   Commanders
   Secretary of the Navy The Honorable Ray Mabus
   Chief of Naval Operations ADM Jonathan W. Greenert
   Vice Chief of Naval Operations ADM Michelle J. Howard
   Master Chief Petty Officer MCPON Michael D. Stevens
   Insignia
   Flag USNavyFlag-Official.svg
   Jack Naval Jack of the United States.svg

   The United States Navy (USN) is the naval warfare service branch of the
   United States Armed Forces and one of the seven uniformed services of
   the United States. It was estimated to be larger than the next 13
   largest navies combined in terms of battle fleet tonnage in
   2009.^[5]^[6] The U.S. Navy also has the world's largest aircraft
   carrier fleet, with ten in service, two under construction,^[7] eight
   more planned, and two in active reserve. The service has 317,054
   personnel on active duty and 109,671 in the Navy Reserve. It operates
   291 ships in active service and more than 3,700 aircraft as of
   September 2014^[update].^[3]

   The U.S. Navy traces its origins to the Continental Navy, which was
   established during the American Revolutionary War and was essentially
   disbanded as a separate entity shortly thereafter. It played a major
   role in the American Civil War by blockading the Confederacy and
   seizing control of its rivers. It played the central role in the World
   War II defeat of Japan. The 21st century U.S. Navy maintains a sizable
   global presence, deploying in such areas as East Asia, the
   Mediterranean, and the Middle East. It is a blue-water navy with the
   ability to project force onto the littoral regions of the world, engage
   in forward areas during peacetime, and rapidly respond to regional
   crises, making it an active player in U.S. foreign and defense policy.

   The Navy is administratively managed by the Department of the Navy,
   which is headed by the civilian Secretary of the Navy. The Department
   of the Navy is itself a division of the Department of Defense, which is
   headed by the Secretary of Defense. The Chief of Naval Operations is a
   four-star admiral and the senior naval officer of the Department of the
   Navy.^[8] However, the CNO may not be the highest ranking naval officer
   in the armed forces if the Chairman or the Vice Chairman of the Joint
   Chiefs of Staff are Navy officers, who by law, outrank the CNO.

Contents

     * 1 Mission
     * 2 History
          + 2.1 Origins
          + 2.2 From reestablishment to the Civil War
          + 2.3 20th century
               o 2.3.1 World War I and interwar years
               o 2.3.2 World War II
               o 2.3.3 Cold War
          + 2.4 21st century
     * 3 Organization
          + 3.1 Operating forces
          + 3.2 Shore establishments
          + 3.3 Relationships with other service branches
               o 3.3.1 United States Marine Corps
               o 3.3.2 United States Coast Guard
     * 4 Personnel
     * 5 Bases
          + 5.1 Eastern United States
          + 5.2 Western United States and Hawaii
          + 5.3 United States territories
          + 5.4 Foreign countries
     * 6 Equipment
          + 6.1 Ships
               o 6.1.1 Aircraft carriers
               o 6.1.2 Amphibious warfare vessels
               o 6.1.3 Surface vessels
               o 6.1.4 Submarines
          + 6.2 Aircraft
          + 6.3 Weapons
     * 7 Naval Jack
     * 8 Notable sailors
     * 9 See also
     * 10 References
          + 10.1 Notes
          + 10.2 Sources
     * 11 External links

Mission[edit]

     The mission of the Navy is to maintain, train and equip combat-ready
     Naval forces capable of winning wars, deterring aggression and
     maintaining freedom of the seas.

   —Mission statement of the United States Navy^[9]

   From the New Recruits Handbook:^[10]

     The mission of the United States Navy is to protect and defend the
     right of the United States and our allies to move freely on the
     oceans and to protect our country against her enemies.

   The United States Navy is a seaborne branch of the military of the
   United States. The Navy's three primary areas of responsibility:^[11]
     * The preparation of naval forces necessary for the effective
       prosecution of war
     * The maintenance of naval aviation, including land-based naval
       aviation, air transport essential for naval operations and all air
       weapons and air techniques involved in the operations and
       activities of the Navy
     * The development of aircraft, weapons, tactics, technique,
       organization, and equipment of naval combat and service elements.

   U.S. Navy training manuals state that the mission of the U.S. Armed
   Forces is "to prepare and conduct prompt and sustained combat
   operations in support of the national interest."^[12] As part of that
   establishment, the U.S. Navy's functions comprise sea control, power
   projection and nuclear deterrence, in addition to "sealift"
   duties.^[13]

History[edit]

   Main article: History of the United States Navy

Origins[edit]

     "It follows then as certain as that night succeeds the day, that
     without a decisive naval force we can do nothing definitive, and
     with it, everything honorable and glorious."

   —George Washington^[14]

   The Navy was rooted in the American seafaring tradition, which produced
   a large community of sailors, captains and shipbuilders in the colonial
   era.^[15] In the early stages of the American Revolutionary War,
   Massachusetts had its own navy. The establishment of a national navy
   was an issue of debate among the members of the Continental Congress.
   Supporters argued that a navy would protect shipping, defend the coast,
   and make it easier to seek out support from foreign countries.
   Detractors countered that challenging the British Royal Navy, then the
   world's preeminent naval power, was a foolish undertaking. Commander in
   Chief George Washington resolved the debate when he commissioned seven
   ocean-going cruisers, starting with the schooner USS Hannah, to
   interdict British supply ships, and reported the captures to the
   Congress.

   The Continental Navy achieved mixed results; it was successful in a
   number of engagements and raided many British merchant vessels, but it
   lost 24 of its vessels^[16] and at one point was reduced to two in
   active service.^[17] The Continental Navy was disbanded at war's end.

From reestablishment to the Civil War[edit]

   USS Constellation vs L'Insurgente during the Quasi-War

   The United States was without a navy for nearly a decade—a state of
   affairs that exposed its merchant ships to a series of attacks by
   Barbary pirates. The sole armed maritime presence between 1790 and the
   launching of the U.S. Navy's first warships in 1797 was the U.S.
   Revenue Cutter Service (USRCS), the primary predecessor of the U.S.
   Coast Guard. Although USRCS Cutters conducted operations against these
   pirates, the depredations far outstripped the abilities of the USRCS
   and Congress passed the Naval Act of 1794 which established a permanent
   standing navy. The Naval Act ordered the construction and manning of
   six frigates and, by October of 1797;^[16] three years later, the first
   three were welcomed into service: USS United States, USS Constellation,
   and USS Constitution. In 1798–99 the Navy was involved in an undeclared
   Quasi-War with France.

   President Thomas Jefferson and his Republican party opposed a strong
   navy, arguing that small gunboats in the major harbors were all that
   the nation needed to defend itself. They proved useless in
   wartime.^[18]

   The U.S. Navy saw substantial action in the War of 1812, where it was
   victorious in eleven single-ship duels with the Royal Navy. The navy
   drove all significant British forces off Lake Erie and Lake Champlain
   and prevented them from becoming British controlled zones of conflict.
   The result was a major defeat for the British invasion of New York
   state, and the defeat of the military threat from the Indian allies of
   the British. Despite this, the U.S. Navy was unable to prevent the
   British from blockading American ports and landing troops on American
   soil.^[19] After the war, the U.S. Navy again focused its attention on
   protecting American shipping assets, sending squadrons to the
   Caribbean, the Mediterranean, South America, Africa, and the
   Pacific.^[16] From 1819 to the outbreak of the Civil War the Africa
   Squadron operated to suppress the slave trade, seizing 36 slave ships,
   although its contribution was smaller than that of the much larger
   British Royal Navy.
   USS Constitution vs HMS Guerriere during the War of 1812

   During the Mexican-American War the U.S. Navy contributed by
   instituting blockades of Mexican ports, capturing or burning the
   Mexican fleet in the Gulf of California and capturing all major cities
   in Baja California peninsula—later returned. In 1846–1848 the navy
   successfully used the Pacific Squadron under Commodore (Rear Admiral)
   Robert Stockton and its marines and blue-jackets to facilitate the
   capture of California with large scale land operations coordinated with
   the local militia organized in the California Battalion. The navy
   conducted the U.S. military's first large-scale amphibious joint
   operation by successfully landing 12,000 army troops with their
   equipment in one day at Veracruz, Mexico. When larger guns were needed
   to bombard Veracruz, navy volunteers landed large navy guns and manned
   them in the successful bombardment and capture of the city. This
   successful landing and capture of Veracruz opened the way for the
   capture of Mexico City and the end of the war.^[19] The United States
   Navy established itself as a player in American foreign policy through
   the actions of Commodore Matthew Perry in Japan, which resulted in the
   Convention of Kanagawa in 1854.

   Naval power played a significant role during the American Civil War,
   where the Union had a distinct advantage over the Confederacy on the
   seas.^[19] A Union blockade on all major ports shut down exports and
   the coastal trade, but blockade runners (mostly owned and operated by
   British companies) provided a thin lifeline. The brown-water Navy's
   control of the river systems made internal travel difficult for
   Confederates and easy for the Union. The war saw ironclad warships in
   combat for the first time at the Battle of Hampton Roads in 1862, which
   pitted USS Monitor against CSS Virginia.^[20] For two decades after the
   war, however, the U.S. Navy's fleet was neglected and became
   technologically obsolete.

20th century[edit]

   The Great White Fleet demonstrates U.S. naval power in 1907; it was
   proof that the U.S. Navy had blue-water capability.

     Our ships are our natural bulwarks.

   —Woodrow Wilson^[14]

   A modernization program beginning in the 1880s with the first steel
   hulled warships stimulated the American steel industry and "the new
   steel navy" was born.^[21] This rapid expansion of the U.S. Navy and
   its easy victory over the Spanish Navy in 1898 brought a new respect
   for American technical quality. Rapid building of at first
   pre-dreadnoughts, then dreadnoughts brought the U.S. in line with the
   navies of countries such as Britain and Germany. In 1907, most of the
   Navy's battleships, with several support vessels, dubbed the Great
   White Fleet, were showcased in a 14-month circumnavigation of the
   world. Ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was a mission
   designed to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global
   theater.^[16] By 1911, the U.S. had begun building the
   super-dreadnoughts at a pace to eventually become competitive with
   Britain.^[22]
   Columbia, personification of the United States, wearing a warship
   bearing the words "World Power" as her "Easter bonnet" on the cover of
   Puck, 6 April 1901.

World War I and interwar years[edit]

   The navy saw little action during World War I. It concentrated on mine
   laying operations against German U-Boats. Hesitation by the senior
   command meant that naval forces were not contributed until late 1917.
   Battleship Division Nine was dispatched to Britain and served as the
   Sixth Battle Squadron of the British Grand Fleet. Its presence allowed
   the British to decommission some older ships and reuse the crews on
   smaller vessels. Destroyers and U.S. Naval Air Force units contributed
   to the anti-submarine operations. The strength of the United States
   Navy grew under an ambitious ship building program associated with the
   Naval Act of 1916.

   Naval construction, especially of battleships was limited by the
   Washington Naval Conference of 1921–22. The aircraft carriers
   USS Saratoga (CV-3) and USS Lexington (CV-2) were built on the hulls of
   partially built battle cruisers that had been canceled by the treaty.
   The New Deal used Public Works Administration funds to build warships,
   such as USS Yorktown (CV-5) and USS Enterprise (CV-6). By 1936, with
   the completion of USS Wasp (CV-7), the U.S. Navy possessed a carrier
   fleet of 165,000 tonnes displacement, although this figure was
   nominally recorded as 135,000 tonnes to comply with treaty limitations.
   President Franklin Roosevelt, the number two official in the Navy
   Department during World War I, appreciated the Navy and gave it strong
   support. In return, senior leaders were eager for innovation and
   experimented with new technologies, such as magnetic torpedoes, and
   developed a strategy called War Plan Orange for victory in the Pacific
   in a hypothetical war with Japan.^[23]

World War II[edit]

   Main article: United States Navy in World War II
   The battleship USS Idaho shells Okinawa on April 1, 1945

   The U.S. Navy grew into a formidable force in the years prior to World
   War II, with battleship production being restarted in 1937, commencing
   with the USS North Carolina (BB-55). Though ultimately unsuccessful,
   Japan attempted to neutralize this strategic threat with the 1941
   surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. Following American entry into the war,
   the U.S. Navy grew tremendously as the United States was faced with a
   two-front war on the seas. It achieved notable acclaim in the Pacific
   Theater, where it was instrumental to the Allies' successful "island
   hopping" campaign.^[17] The U.S. Navy participated in many significant
   battles, including the Battle of the Coral Sea, the Battle of Midway,
   the Solomon Islands Campaign, the Battle of the Philippine Sea, the
   Battle of Leyte Gulf, and the Battle of Okinawa. By 1943, the navy's
   size was larger than the combined fleets of all the other combatant
   nations in World War II.^[24] By war's end in 1945, the United States
   Navy had added hundreds of new ships, including 18 aircraft carriers
   and 8 battleships, and had over 70% of the world's total numbers and
   total tonnage of naval vessels of 1,000 tons or greater.^[25]^[26] At
   its peak, the U.S. Navy was operating 6,768 ships on V-J Day in August
   1945.^[27]

   Doctrine had significantly shifted by the end of the war. The United
   States Navy had followed in the footsteps of the navies of Great
   Britain and Germany which favored concentrated groups of battleships as
   their main offensive naval weapons.^[28] The development of the
   aircraft carrier and its devastating utilization by the Japanese
   against the U.S. at Pearl Harbor, however, shifted U.S. thinking. The
   Pearl Harbor attack destroyed or took out of action a significant
   number of U.S. Navy battleships. This placed much of the burden of
   retaliating against the Japanese on the small number of aircraft
   carriers.^[29]

Cold War[edit]

   The potential for armed conflict with the Soviet Union during the Cold
   War pushed the U.S. Navy to continue its technological advancement by
   developing new weapons systems, ships, and aircraft. United States
   naval strategy changed to that of forward deployment in support of U.S.
   allies with an emphasis on carrier battle groups.^[30]

   The navy was a major participant in the Vietnam War, blockaded Cuba
   during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and, through the use of ballistic
   missile submarines, became an important aspect of the United States'
   nuclear strategic deterrence policy. The United States Navy conducted
   various combat operations in the Persian Gulf against Iran in 1987 and
   1988, most notably Operation Praying Mantis. The Navy was extensively
   involved in Operation Urgent Fury, Operation Desert Shield, Operation
   Desert Storm, Operation Deliberate Force, Operation Allied Force,
   Operation Desert Fox and Operation Southern Watch.

   The U.S. Navy has also been involved in search and rescue/search and
   salvage operations, sometimes in conjunction with vessels of other
   countries as well as with U.S. Coast Guard ships. Two examples are the
   1966 Palomares B-52 crash incident and search for the nuclear bombs,
   and Task Force 71 of the Seventh Fleet operation in search for Korean
   Air Lines Flight 007 shot down by the Soviets on 1 September 1983.

21st century[edit]

   Six modern amphibious assault ships of the U.S. Navy in formation in
   April 2003

     When a crisis confronts the nation, the first question often asked
     by policymakers is: 'What naval forces are available and how fast
     can they be on station?'

   —Admiral Carlisle A. H. Trost^[31]

   The United States Navy continues to be a major support to U.S.
   interests in the 21st century. Since the end of the Cold War, it has
   shifted its focus from preparations for large-scale war with the Soviet
   Union to special operations and strike missions in regional
   conflicts.^[32] The navy participated in Operation Enduring Freedom,
   Operation Iraqi Freedom, and is a major participant in the ongoing War
   on Terror, largely in this capacity. Development continues on new ships
   and weapons, including the Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier and
   the Littoral combat ship. Because of its size, weapons technology, and
   ability to project force far from U.S. shores, the current U.S. Navy
   remains a potent asset for the United States.
   The USS America Amphibious assault ship, launched in 2012.

   In 2007, the U.S. Navy joined with the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Coast
   Guard to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy
   for 21st Century Seapower that raises the notion of prevention of war
   to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war. The strategy was
   presented by the Chief of Naval Operations, the Commandant of the
   Marine Corps, and Commandant of the Coast Guard at the International
   Sea Power Symposium in Newport, R.I. on 17 October 2007.^[33] The
   strategy recognized the economic links of the global system and how any
   disruption due to regional crises—man made or natural—can adversely
   impact the U.S. economy and quality of life. This new strategy charts a
   course for the Navy, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps to work collectively
   with each other and international partners to prevent these crises from
   occurring or reacting quickly should one occur to prevent negative
   impacts on the United States.

   During the George W. Bush administration, the fleet dropped to a total
   number of ships that was smaller than at any time since 1917.^[34]

   In 2010, Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Gary Roughead, noted that
   demands on the Navy have grown as the fleet has shrunk and that in the
   face of declining budgets in the future, the U.S. Navy must rely even
   more on international partnerships.^[35]

   In its 2013 budget request, the navy focused on retaining all eleven
   big deck carriers, at the expense of cutting numbers of smaller ships
   and delaying the SSBN replacement.^[36] By the next year the USN found
   itself unable to maintain eleven aircraft carriers in the face of the
   expiration of budget relief offered by the Bipartisan Budget Act of
   2013 and CNO Jonathan Greenert said that a ten ship carrier fleet would
   not be able to sustainably support military requirements.^[37] First
   sea lord George Zambellas said that the USN had switched from
   "outcome-led to resource-led" planning.^[38]

   The US Navy currently has a three-step plan to boost the fleets'
   firepower: in the near-term, develop the Long Range Anti-Ship Missile
   to create a surface-launched, over-the-horizon cruise missile with
   greater coverage than the 75 mi (121 km)-ranged Harpoon anti-ship
   missile to have the capability that was lost with the retirement of the
   Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile; in the mid-term, replace defensive missile
   systems with laser weapon systems; and in the long-term, equip ships
   with electromagnetic railguns for over-the-horizon bombardment. Lasers
   like the Laser Weapon System in testing are currently for defense of
   ships and would allow missile compartments to be freed up for offensive
   system, while the laser could run as long as the ship has power. They
   may only be relegated to short-range defensive work, as they cannot
   fire over the horizon or out of line-of-sight. Railguns will be
   offensive and fire projectiles at Mach 7 out to 125 mi (201 km). They
   will serve as a complement to cruise missiles, as they have less range,
   components wear out fast, and currently only Zumwalt-class destroyers
   can generate enough electrical power for desired performance.^[39]

Organization[edit]

   Main article: Structure of the United States Navy
   Simplified flowchart of U.S. Navy command structure

   The Navy falls under the administration of the Department of the Navy,
   under civilian leadership of the Secretary of the Navy (SECNAV). The
   most senior naval officer is the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO), a
   four-star admiral who is immediately under and reports to the Secretary
   of the Navy. At the same time, the Chief of Naval Operations is one of
   the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which is the second-highest deliberatory
   body of the armed forces after the United States National Security
   Council, although it only plays an advisory role to the President and
   does not nominally form part of the chain of command. The Secretary of
   the Navy and Chief of Naval Operations are responsible for organizing,
   recruiting, training, and equipping the Navy so that it is ready for
   operation under the command of the unified combat command commanders.

Operating forces[edit]

   Main article: List of units of the United States Navy

   There are nine components in the operating forces of the U.S. Navy: the
   United States Fleet Forces Command (formerly United States Atlantic
   Fleet), United States Pacific Fleet, United States Naval Forces Central
   Command, United States Naval Forces Europe, Naval Network Warfare
   Command, Navy Reserve, United States Naval Special Warfare Command,
   Operational Test and Evaluation Force, and Military Sealift Command.
   Fleet Forces Command controls a number of unique capabilities,
   including Military Sealift Command, Naval Expeditionary Combat Command,
   and Navy Cyber Forces.

   The United States Navy has six active numbered fleets – Third, Fifth,
   Sixth, Seventh Fleet and Tenth Fleets are each led by a three-star vice
   admiral, and the Fourth Fleet is led by a rear admiral. These six
   fleets are further grouped under Fleet Forces Command (the former
   Atlantic Fleet), Pacific Fleet, Naval Forces Europe-Africa, and Naval
   Forces Central Command, whose commander also doubles as Commander Fifth
   Fleet; the first three commands being led by four-star admirals. The
   United States First Fleet existed after the Second World War from 1947,
   but it was redesignated the Third Fleet in early 1973. In early 2008,
   the navy reactivated the United States Fourth Fleet to control
   operations in the area controlled by Southern Command, which consists
   of US assets in and around Central and South America.^[40]

Shore establishments[edit]

   USS Kitty Hawk (CV-63) docks at the U.S. Navy base in Yokosuka, Japan.

   Shore establishments exist to support the mission of the fleet through
   the use of facilities on land. Among the commands of the shore
   establishment, as of April 2011, are the Naval Education and Training
   Command, the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command, the Space and
   Naval Warfare Systems Command, the Naval Facilities Engineering
   Command, the Naval Supply Systems Command, the Naval Air Systems
   Command, the Naval Sea Systems Command, the Bureau of Medicine and
   Surgery, the Bureau of Naval Personnel, the United States Naval
   Academy, the Naval Safety Center, the Naval Strike and Air Warfare
   Center, and the United States Naval Observatory.^[41] Official Navy
   websites list the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the chief
   of naval operations as part of the shore establishment, but these two
   entities effectively sit superior to the other organizations, playing a
   coordinating role.

Relationships with other service branches[edit]

United States Marine Corps[edit]

   A Marine F/A-18 from VMFA-451 prepares to launch from USS Coral
   Sea (CV-43)
   Main article: United States Marine Corps

   In 1834, the United States Marine Corps came under the Department of
   the Navy.^[42] Historically, the Navy has had a unique relationship
   with the USMC, partly because they both specialize in seaborne
   operations. Together the Navy and Marine Corps form the Department of
   the Navy and report to the secretary of the navy. However, the Marine
   Corps is a distinct, separate service branch^[43] with its own
   uniformed service chief – the Commandant of the Marine Corps, a
   four-star general.

   The Marine Corps depends on the Navy for medical support (dentists,
   doctors, nurses, medical technicians known as corpsmen) and religious
   support (chaplains). Thus Navy officers and enlisted sailors fulfill
   these roles. When attached to Marine Corps units deployed to an
   operational environment they generally wear marine camouflage uniforms,
   but otherwise they wear Navy dress uniforms unless they opt to conform
   to Marine Corps grooming standards.

   In the operational environment, as an expeditionary force specializing
   in amphibious operations, Marines often embark on Navy ships in order
   to conduct operations from beyond territorial waters. Marine units
   deploying as part of a Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) operate
   under the command of the existing Marine chain of command. Although
   Marine units routinely operate from amphibious assault ships the
   relationship has evolved over the years much as the Commander of the
   Carrier Air Group/Wing (CAG) does not work for the carrier commanding
   officer, but coordinates with the ship's CO and staff. Some Marine
   aviation squadrons, usually fixed-wing assigned to carrier air wings
   train and operate alongside Navy squadrons, flying similar missions and
   often flying sorties together under the cognizance of the CAG. Aviation
   is where the Navy and Marines share the most common ground, since
   aircrews are guided in their use of aircraft by standard procedures
   outlined in series of publications known as NATOPS manuals.

United States Coast Guard[edit]

   A U.S. Coast Guard helicopter prepares to land on the flight deck of
   the amphibious assault ship USS Wasp (LHD-1).
   Main article: United States Coast Guard

   The United States Coast Guard, in its peacetime role with the
   Department of Homeland Security, fulfills its law enforcement and
   rescue role in the maritime environment. It provides Law Enforcement
   Detachments (LEDETs) to Navy vessels, where they perform arrests and
   other law enforcement duties during naval boarding and interdiction
   missions. In times of war, the Coast Guard operates as a service in the
   Navy.^[44] At other times, Coast Guard port security units are sent
   overseas to guard the security of ports and other assets. The Coast
   Guard also jointly staffs the Navy's naval coastal warfare groups and
   squadrons (the latter of which were known as harbor defense commands
   until late-2004), which oversee defense efforts in foreign littoral
   combat and inshore areas.

Personnel[edit]

   Main article: Personnel of the United States Navy
   Navy SEALs at one of the entrances Zhawar Kili cave complex.

   The United States Navy has nearly 500,000 personnel, approximately a
   quarter of whom are in ready reserve. Of those on active duty, more
   than eighty percent are enlisted sailors, and around fifteen percent
   are commissioned officers; the rest are midshipmen of the United States
   Naval Academy and midshipmen of the Naval Reserve Officer Training
   Corps at over 180 universities around the country and officer
   candidates at the Navy's Officer Candidate School.^[3]

   Sailors prove they have mastered skills and deserve responsibilities by
   completing Personnel Qualification Standards (PQS) tasks and
   examinations. Among the most important is the "warfare qualification",
   which denotes a journeyman level of capability in Surface Warfare,
   Aviation Warfare, Information Dominance Warfare, Naval Aircrew, Special
   Warfare, Seabee Warfare, Submarine Warfare or Expeditionary Warfare.
   Many qualifications are denoted on a sailor's uniform with U.S. Navy
   badges and insignia.

Bases[edit]

   Main article: List of United States Navy installations
   Map of Navy bases in the United States

   The size, complexity, and international presence of the United States
   Navy requires a large number of navy installations to support its
   operations. While the majority of bases are located inside the United
   States itself, the navy maintains a significant number of facilities
   abroad, either in U.S.-controlled territories or in foreign countries
   under a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).

Eastern United States[edit]

   The second largest concentration of installations is at Hampton Roads,
   Virginia, where the navy occupies over 36,000 acres (15,000 ha) of
   land. Located at Hampton Roads are Naval Station Norfolk, homeport of
   the Atlantic Fleet; NAS Oceana, a Master Jet Base; Naval Amphibious
   Base Little Creek; and Training Support Center Hampton Roads as well as
   a number of Navy and commercial shipyards that service navy vessels.
   Also in Virginia is the Aegis Training and Readiness Center located at
   NSA Dahlgren. Maryland is home to Naval Air Station Patuxent River,
   which houses the Navy's Test Pilot School. Also located in Maryland is
   the United States Naval Academy, situated in Annapolis. Naval Station
   Newport in Newport, Rhode Island is home to many schools and tenant
   commands, including the Officer Candidate School, Naval Undersea
   Warfare Center, and more, and also maintains inactive ships.

   There is also a naval base in Charleston, South Carolina. This is home
   to the Nuclear A-School, and the Nuclear Field Power school, and one of
   two nuclear 'Prototype' Schools. The state of Florida is the location
   of three major bases, Naval Station Mayport, the Navy's fourth largest,
   in Jacksonville, Florida; Naval Air Station Jacksonville, a Master Air
   Anti-submarine Warfare base; and Naval Air Station Pensacola; home of
   the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Air Technical
   Training Center that provides specialty training for enlisted aviation
   personnel and is the primary flight training base for Navy and Marine
   Corps Naval Flight Officers and enlisted Naval Aircrewmen. There is
   also Naval Support Activity in Panama City Beach, Florida which is home
   to the Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center.

   The main U.S. Navy submarine bases on the east coast are located in
   Groton, Connecticut and Kings Bay, Georgia. There is a naval shipyard
   in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, which repairs naval submarines.^[45]
   Naval Station Great Lakes, north of Chicago, Illinois is the home of
   the Navy's boot camp for enlisted sailors.

Western United States and Hawaii[edit]

   Underwater Demolition Team members using the casting technique from a
   speeding boat.
   Combat Camera Underwater Photo Team – A US Navy diver during underwater
   photography training off the coast of Guantanamo Bay.

   The navy's largest complex is China Lake, California, which covers
   1.1 million acres (4,500 km^2) of land, or approximately 1/3 of the
   United States Navy's total land holdings.^[45]

   Naval Base San Diego, California, is the main homeport of the Pacific
   Fleet (although its headquarters is located in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii).
   NAS North Island is located on the north side of Coronado, and is home
   to Headquarters for Naval Air Forces and Naval Air Force Pacific, the
   bulk of the Pacific Fleet's helicopter squadrons, and part of the West
   Coast aircraft carrier fleet. Naval Amphibious Base Coronado is located
   on the southern end of the Coronado Island and is home to the navy's
   west coast SEAL teams and special boat units. Naval Amphibious Base
   Coronado is also home to the Naval Special Warfare Center, the primary
   training center for SEALs.

   The other major collection of naval bases on the west coast is in Puget
   Sound, Washington. Among them, Naval Station Everett is one of the
   newer bases and the navy states that it is its most modern
   facility.^[46]

   NAS Fallon, Nevada serves as the primary training ground for navy
   strike aircrews, and is home to the Naval Strike Air Warfare Center.
   Master Jet Bases are also located at NAS Lemoore, California and NAS
   Whidbey Island, Washington, while the carrier-based airborne early
   warning aircraft community and major air test activities are located at
   NAS Point Mugu, California. The naval presence in Hawaii is centered on
   Pearl Harbor Naval Base, which hosts the headquarters of the Pacific
   Fleet and many of its subordinate commands.^[45]

United States territories[edit]

   USS Carl Vinson (CVN-70) pier side in Apra Harbor, Guam.

   Guam, an island strategically located in the Western Pacific Ocean,
   maintains a sizable U.S. Navy presence, including Naval Base Guam. The
   westernmost U.S. territory, it contains a natural deep water harbor
   capable of harboring aircraft carriers in emergencies.^[47] Its naval
   air station was deactivated^[48] in 1995 and its flight activities
   transferred to nearby Andersen Air Force Base.

   Puerto Rico in the Caribbean formerly housed Roosevelt Roads Naval
   Station, which was shut down in 2004 shortly after the controversial
   closure of the live ordnance training area on nearby Vieques
   Island.^[45]

Foreign countries[edit]

   The largest overseas base is in Yokosuka, Japan,^[49] which serves as
   the home port for the navy's largest forward-deployed fleet and is a
   significant base of operations in the Western Pacific.

   European operations revolve around facilities in Italy (Sigonella and
   Naples), Spain and Greece with Naples as the homeport for the Sixth
   Fleet and Command Naval Region Europe (CNRE), which are based in Gaeta.

   In the Middle East, naval facilities are located almost exclusively in
   countries bordering the Persian Gulf, with Manama, Bahrain serving as
   the headquarters of U.S. Naval Forces Central Command and U.S. Fifth
   Fleet.

   Guantánamo Bay in Cuba is the oldest overseas facility and has become
   known in recent years as the location of a detention camp for suspected
   al-Qaeda operatives.^[50]

Equipment[edit]

   Main article: Equipment of the United States Navy

   As of 2013, the navy operates 283 ships, 3,659 aircraft, 50,000
   non-combat vehicles and owns 75,200 buildings on 3,300,000 acres
   (13,000 km^2). In addition, the Navy has 122 ships operated by the
   Military Sealift Command (MSC) crewed by a combination of civilian
   contractors and a small number of uniformed Naval personnel.

Ships[edit]

   Main article: List of United States Navy ships
   See also: United States Navy ships, List of current ships of the United
   States Navy and List of currently active United States military
   watercraft
   USS Nimitz (CVN-68), a Nimitz-class aircraft carrier.
   USS Bataan (LHD-5), a Wasp-class amphibious assault ship.
   USS San Antonio (LPD-17), a San Antonio-class amphibious transport
   dock.
   USS Port Royal (CG-73), a Ticonderoga-class cruiser.
   USS Zumwalt, a Zumwalt -class stealth guided missile destroyer.
   USS Independence, a Littoral combat ship.
   USS Kentucky (SSBN-737), an Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine.
   USS Virginia, a Virginia -class attack submarine.

   The names of commissioned ships of the U.S. Navy are prefixed with the
   letters "USS", designating "United States Ship".^[51] Non-commissioned,
   civilian-manned vessels of the navy have names that begin with "USNS",
   standing for "United States Naval Ship" The names of ships are
   officially selected by the secretary of the navy, often to honor
   important people or places.^[52] Additionally, each ship is given a
   letter-based hull classification symbol (for example, CVN or DDG) to
   indicate the vessel's type and number. All ships in the navy inventory
   are placed in the Naval Vessel Register, which is part of "the Navy
   List" (required by article 29 of the United Nations Convention on the
   Law of the Sea).^[dubious – discuss] The register tracks data such as
   the current status of a ship, the date of its commissioning, and the
   date of its decommissioning. Vessels that are removed from the register
   prior to disposal are said to be stricken from the register. The navy
   also maintains a reserve fleet of inactive vessels that are maintained
   for reactivation in times of need.

   The U.S. Navy was one of the first to install nuclear reactors aboard
   naval vessels;^[53] today, nuclear energy powers all active U.S.
   aircraft carriers and submarines. In the case of the Nimitz-class
   carrier, two naval reactors give the ship almost unlimited range and
   provide enough electrical energy to power a city of 100,000
   people.^[54] The U.S. Navy previously operated nuclear-powered
   cruisers, but all have been decommissioned.

   The U.S. Navy has identified a need for 313 combat ships, but under the
   current plans will only be able to afford 232 to 243.^[55] In March
   2014, the Navy is considering counting deployable ships such as
   minesweepers, patrol craft, and hospital ships in the "battle fleet" in
   order to reach a count of 291,^[56] and also ships that have been put
   in "shrink wrap".^[57]

Aircraft carriers[edit]

   The navy had established a minimum requirement for 11 aircraft
   carriers, but dropped to 10 when Enterprise was retired in December
   2012, before Gerald R. Ford enters service.^[58]

   A carrier is typically deployed along with a host of additional
   vessels, forming a carrier strike group. The supporting ships, which
   usually include three or four Aegis-equipped cruisers and destroyers, a
   frigate, and two attack submarines, are tasked with protecting the
   carrier from air, missile, sea, and undersea threats as well as
   providing additional strike capabilities themselves. Ready logistics
   support for the group is provided by a combined ammunition, oiler, and
   supply ship.
     * Nimitz class – 10 in commission
     * Gerald R. Ford class – 1 completed, 1 under construction, 1 planned

Amphibious warfare vessels[edit]

   Amphibious assault ships are the centerpieces of US amphibious warfare
   and fulfill the same power projection role as aircraft carriers except
   that their striking force centers on land forces instead of aircraft.
   They deliver, command, coordinate, and fully support all elements of a
   2,200-strong marine amphibious unit in an amphibious assault using both
   air and amphibious vehicles. Resembling small aircraft carriers,
   amphibious assault ships are capable of V/STOL, STOVL, VTOL, tiltrotor,
   and rotary wing aircraft operations. They also contain a well deck to
   support the use of Landing Craft Air Cushion (LCAC) and other
   amphibious assault watercraft. Recently, amphibious assault ships have
   begun to be deployed as the core of an expeditionary strike group,
   which usually consists of an additional amphibious transport dock and
   dock landing ship for amphibious warfare and an Aegis-equipped cruiser
   and destroyer, frigate, and attack submarine for group defense.
   Amphibious assault ships are typically named after World War II
   aircraft carriers.
     * Tarawa class – 1 in commission
     * Wasp class – 8 in commission
     * America class – 1 completed, 10 more planned^[59]

   Amphibious transport docks are warships that embark, transport, and
   land Marines, supplies, and equipment in a supporting role during
   amphibious warfare missions. With a landing platform, amphibious
   transport docks also have the capability to serve as secondary aviation
   support for an expeditionary group. All amphibious transport docks can
   operate helicopters, LCACs, and other conventional amphibious vehicles
   while the newer San Antonio class of ships has been explicitly designed
   to operate all three elements of the marines' "mobility triad":
   Expeditionary Fighting Vehicles (EFVs), the V-22 Osprey tiltrotor
   aircraft, and LCACs. Amphibious transport docks are named for cities,
   except for USS Mesa Verde (LPD-19), named for Mesa Verde National Park
   in Colorado, and three San Antonio class ships named in memory of the
   September 11, 2001 attacks.
     * Austin class – 1 in commission
     * San Antonio class – 9 in commission, 2 under construction

   The dock landing ship is a medium amphibious transport that is designed
   specifically to support and operate LCACs, though it is able to operate
   other amphibious assault vehicles in the United States inventory as
   well. Dock landing ships are normally deployed as a component of an
   expeditionary strike group's amphibious assault contingent, operating
   as a secondary launch platform for LCACs. All dock landing ships are
   named after locations in the United States.
     * Whidbey Island class – 8 in commission
     * Harpers Ferry class – 4 in commission

Surface vessels[edit]

   Cruisers are large surface combat vessels that conduct
   anti-air/anti-missile warfare, surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare,
   and strike operations independently or as members of a larger task
   force. Modern guided missile cruisers were developed out of a need to
   counter the anti-ship missile threat facing the United States Navy.
   This led to the development of the AN/SPY-1 phased array radar and the
   Standard missile with the Aegis combat system coordinating the two.
   Ticonderoga-class cruisers were the first to be equipped with Aegis and
   were put to use primarily as anti-air and anti-missile defense in a
   battle force protection role. Later developments of vertical launch
   systems and the Tomahawk missile gave cruisers additional long-range
   land and sea strike capability, making them capable of both offensive
   and defensive battle operations. All cruisers since CG-47 have been
   named for famous battles with USS Thomas S. Gates (CG-51) as the only
   exception. Previously, cruisers were either named for cities (until
   CG-12), former important navy figures (CG-15 to CG-35), or states
   (CGN-36 to CGN-41).
     * Ticonderoga class – 22 in commission

   Destroyers are multi-mission medium surface ships capable of sustained
   performance in anti-air, anti-submarine, anti-ship, and offensive
   strike operations. Like cruisers, guided missile destroyers are
   primarily focused on surface strikes using Tomahawk missiles and fleet
   defense through Aegis and the Standard missile. Destroyers additionally
   specialize in anti-submarine warfare and are equipped with VLA rockets
   and LAMPS Mk III Sea Hawk helicopters to deal with underwater threats.
   When deployed with a carrier strike group or expeditionary strike
   group, destroyers and their fellow Aegis-equipped cruisers are
   primarily tasked with defending the fleet while providing secondary
   strike capabilities. Destroyers have been named for important navy
   personnel and heroes since USS Bainbridge (DD-1).
     * Arleigh Burke class – 62 in commission, 1 laid down, 3 under
       construction, 10 more planned^[60]
     * Zumwalt class – 1 completed but not yet in commission, 2 under
       construction

   Modern U.S. frigates mainly perform anti-submarine warfare for carrier
   strike groups and amphibious expeditionary groups and provide armed
   escort for supply convoys and merchant shipping. They are designed to
   protect friendly ships against hostile submarines in low to medium
   threat environments, using torpedoes and LAMPS helicopters.
   Independently, frigates are able to conduct counterdrug missions and
   other maritime interception operations. The U.S. Navy expects to retire
   and replace its current class of frigates by 2020 as the Littoral
   Combat Ships are introduced into operation.^[61] As in the case of
   destroyers, frigates are named after naval heroes.
     * Oliver Hazard Perry class – 10 in commission

   Littoral Combat Ships are split between two designs and are expected to
   total around 40 ships when the program is complete.
     * Freedom class – 2 in commission, 2 under construction, at least 16
       more planned
     * Independence class – 2 in commission, 2 under construction, at
       least 8 more planned

   In addition, USS Constitution, commissioned in 1797 and one of the
   original six frigates of the United States Navy, remains in commission
   at the Charlestown Navy Yard in Boston. She serves as a tribute to the
   heritage of the Navy, and occasionally sails for commemorative events
   such as Independence Day and various victories during the War of 1812.
   Constitution is currently the oldest commissioned warship afloat.
   HMS Victory is older, and in commission, but is in permanent drydock.

Submarines[edit]

   Main article: Submarines in the United States Navy

   The primary missions of submarines in the U.S. Navy are peacetime
   engagement, surveillance and intelligence, special operations,
   precision strikes, battlegroup operations, and control of the
   seas.^[62] The U.S. Navy operates three types: ballistic missile
   submarines, guided missile submarines, and attack submarines. Ballistic
   missile submarines have only one mission: to carry and launch the
   Trident missile. Four Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines were
   converted to guided missile submarines, which have a primary mission of
   attacking targets on land. Attack submarines have several tactical
   missions, including sinking ships and other subs, launching cruise
   missiles, gathering intelligence, and assisting in special operations.
   Earlier attack submarines, such as the Los Angeles class, are typically
   named for cities, while Ohio class and later attack submarines are
   typically named for states. Attack submarines prior to the Los Angeles
   class were named for denizens of the deep, while pre-Ohio-class
   ballistic missile submarines were named for famous Americans and
   foreigners with notable connections to the United States.
     * Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines – 18 in commission, with 4
       converted into guided missile submarines
     * Los Angeles-class attack submarines – 41 in commission (1 of which
       to be decommissioned in Sep 2014), 2 in reserve
     * Seawolf-class attack submarines – 3 in commission
     * Virginia-class attack submarines – 10 in commission, 8 under
       construction, at least 30 more planned

Aircraft[edit]

   Four Navy F/A-18F Super Hornets.
   Main articles: List of United States naval aircraft and List of
   military aircraft of the United States (naval)
   See also: List of United States Navy aircraft squadrons

   Carrier-based aircraft are able to strike air, sea, and land targets
   far from a carrier strike group while protecting friendly forces from
   enemy aircraft, ships, and submarines. In peacetime, aircraft's ability
   to project the threat of sustained attack from a mobile platform on the
   seas gives United States leaders significant diplomatic and
   crisis-management options. Aircraft additionally provide logistics
   support to maintain the navy's readiness and, through helicopters,
   supply platforms with which to conduct search and rescue, special
   operations, anti-submarine warfare (ASW), and anti-surface warfare
   (ASuW).

   The U.S. Navy began to research the use of aircraft at sea in the
   1910s, with Lieutenant Theodore G. "Spuds" Ellyson becoming the first
   naval aviator on 28 January 1911, and commissioned its first aircraft
   carrier, USS Langley (CV-1), in 1922.^[63] United States naval aviation
   fully came of age in World War II, when it became clear following the
   Attack on Pearl Harbor, the Battle of the Coral Sea, and the Battle of
   Midway that aircraft carriers and the planes that they carried had
   replaced the battleship as the greatest weapon on the seas. Leading
   navy aircraft in World War II included the Grumman F4F Wildcat, the
   Grumman F6F Hellcat, the Chance Vought F4U Corsair, the Douglas SBD
   Dauntless, and the Grumman TBF Avenger. Navy aircraft also played a
   significant role in conflicts during the following Cold War years, with
   the F-4 Phantom II and the F-14 Tomcat becoming military icons of the
   era. The navy's current primary fighter and attack airplanes are the
   multi-mission F/A-18C/D Hornet and its newer cousin, the F/A-18E/F
   Super Hornet. The F-35 Lightning II is presently under development and
   was scheduled to replace the C and D versions of the Hornet beginning
   in 2012.^[64] Initial operational capability of the F-35C is now
   expected to be February 2019.^[65] The Navy is also looking to
   eventually replace its F/A-18E/F Super Hornets with the F/A-XX program.

   The Aircraft Investment Plan sees naval aviation growing from 30
   percent of current aviation forces to half of all procurement funding
   over the next three decades.^[66]

Weapons[edit]

   Main article: List of United States Navy weapons

   Current U.S. Navy shipboard weapons systems are almost entirely focused
   on missiles, both as a weapon and as a threat. In an offensive role,
   missiles are intended to strike targets at long distances with accuracy
   and precision. Because they are unmanned weapons, missiles allow for
   attacks on heavily defended targets without risk to human pilots. Land
   strikes are the domain of the BGM-109 Tomahawk, which was first
   deployed in the 1980s and is continually being updated to increase its
   capabilities. For anti-ship strikes, the navy's dedicated missile is
   the Harpoon Missile. To defend against enemy missile attack, the navy
   operates a number of systems that are all coordinated by the Aegis
   combat system. Medium-long range defense is provided by the Standard
   Missile 2, which has been deployed since the 1980s. The Standard
   missile doubles as the primary shipboard anti-aircraft weapon and is
   undergoing development for use in theater ballistic missile defense.
   Short range defense against missiles is provided by the Phalanx CIWS
   and the more recently developed RIM-162 Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile. In
   addition to missiles, the navy employs Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes
   and various types of naval mines.
   Aviation Ordnancemen loading GBU-12 bombs.

   Naval fixed-wing aircraft employ much of the same weapons as the United
   States Air Force for both air-to-air and air-to-surface combat. Air
   engagements are handled by the heat-seeking Sidewinder and the radar
   guided AMRAAM missiles along with the M61 Vulcan cannon for close range
   dogfighting. For surface strikes, navy aircraft utilize a combination
   of missiles, smart bombs, and dumb bombs. On the list of available
   missiles are the Maverick, SLAM-ER and JSOW. Smart bombs include the
   GPS-guided JDAM and the laser-guided Paveway series. Unguided munitions
   such as dumb bombs and cluster bombs make up the rest of the weapons
   deployed by fixed-wing aircraft.

   Rotary aircraft weapons are focused on anti-submarine warfare (ASW) and
   light to medium surface engagements. To combat submarines, helicopters
   use Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes. Against small watercraft, they
   utilize Hellfire and Penguin air to surface missiles. Helicopters also
   employ various types of mounted anti-personnel machine guns, including
   the M60, M240, GAU-16/A, and GAU-17/A.

   Nuclear weapons in the U.S. Navy arsenal are deployed through ballistic
   missile submarines and aircraft. The Ohio-class submarine carries the
   latest iteration of the Trident missile, a three stage,
   submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) with MIRV capability; the
   current Trident II (D5) version is expected to be in service past
   2020.^[67] The navy's other nuclear weapon is the air-deployed B61
   nuclear bomb. The B61 is a thermonuclear device that can be dropped by
   strike aircraft such as the F/A-18 Hornet and Super Hornet at high
   speed from a large range of altitudes. It can be released through
   free-fall or parachute and can be set to detonate in the air or on the
   ground.

Naval Jack[edit]

   U.S. Naval Jack
   FIAV historical.svg FIAV 000001.svg Former U.S. Naval Jack

   The current naval jack of the United States is the First Navy Jack,
   traditionally regarded as having been used during the American
   Revolutionary War. On 31 May 2002, Secretary of the Navy Gordon R.
   England directed all U.S. naval ships to fly the First Navy Jack for
   the duration of the "War on Terror". Many ships chose to shift colors
   later that year on the first anniversary of the September 11, 2001
   attacks. The previous naval jack was a blue field with 50 white stars,
   identical to the canton of the ensign (the flag of the United States)
   both in appearance and size, and continues to remain in use with
   vessels of the U.S. Coast Guard and National Oceanic and Atmospheric
   Administration. A jack of similar design was used in 1794, though with
   13 stars arranged in a 3–2–3–2–3 pattern. When a ship is moored or
   anchored, the jack is flown from the bow of the ship while the ensign
   is flown from the stern. When underway, the ensign is raised on the
   mainmast. The First Naval Jack, however, has always been flown on the
   oldest ship in the active American fleet, currently USS Denver (LPD-9).

Notable sailors[edit]

   Main article: List of United States Navy people

   Many past and present United States historical figures have served in
   the navy. Notable officers include John Paul Jones, John Barry
   (Continental Navy officer and first flag officer of the United States
   Navy),^[68] Edward Preble, James Lawrence (whose last words "don't give
   up the ship" are memorialized in Bancroft Hall at the United States
   Naval Academy), Stephen Decatur, Jr., David Farragut, David Dixon
   Porter, Oliver Hazard Perry, Commodore Matthew Perry (whose Black Ships
   forced the opening of Japan), George Dewey (the only person in the
   history of the United States to have attained the rank of Admiral of
   the Navy), and the officers who attained the rank of Fleet Admiral
   during World War II: William D. Leahy, Ernest J. King, Chester W.
   Nimitz, and William F. Halsey, Jr..

   The first American president who served in the navy was John F. Kennedy
   (who commanded the famous PT-109). Others included Lyndon B. Johnson,
   Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and George H. W. Bush. Both
   Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin D. Roosevelt were the assistant
   secretary of the navy prior to their presidencies. Many members of
   Congress served in the navy, notably U.S. Senators Bob Kerrey, John
   McCain, and John Kerry. Other notable former members of the U.S. Navy
   include astronauts, entertainers, authors and professional athletes.

See also[edit]

   Portal icon Military of the United States portal
   Portal icon United States Navy portal
     * Modern United States Navy carrier air operations

References[edit]

Notes[edit]

    1. ^ "Navy Birthday Information – 13 October 1775". Naval History &
       Heritage Command. United States Navy. Retrieved 25 July 2013.
    2. ^ "Precedence of the U.S. Navy and the Marine Corps". Naval History
       & Heritage Command. United States Navy. Retrieved 25 July 2013.
    3. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e "Status of the Navy". Navy.mil. U.S. Navy. 24
       March 2014.
    4. ^ "Navy Traditions and Customs". Naval History & Heritage Command.
       United States Navy. Retrieved 24 January 2009.
    5. ^ Gates, Robert M. (January–February 2009). "A Balanced Strategy:
       Reprogramming the Pentagon for a New Age". Foreign Affairs (Council
       on Foreign Relations). (subscription required (help)).
    6. ^ Gates, Robert M. (17 April 2009). "Speech". Naval War College
       Newport, Rhode Island.
    7. ^ USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) and USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79)
    8. ^ "Responsibilities". Chief of Naval Operations. United States
       Navy. Retrieved 15 June 2013.
    9. ^ "Mission of the Navy". Navy Organization. United States Navy.
       Retrieved 29 November 2008.
   10. ^ http://www.cnrc.navy.mil/graphic-elements/PDFs/start_guide.pdf
   11. ^ 10 U.S.C. § 5062
   12. ^ St. Marys, Georgia. The Camden County Tribune & Georgian
       Newspaper local news source. > Archives > Opinion > A Global Force
       for Good-The United States Navy. Tribune-georgian.com (2009-10-28).
       Retrieved on 2013-08-16.
   13. ^ "Chapter 20: Sea Power". Basic Military Requirements. United
       States Navy. February 2002. pp. 20–7. NAVEDTRA 14325.
   14. ^ ^a ^b "Famous Navy Quotes: Who Said Them ... and When". Naval
       History & Heritage Command. United States Navy. Retrieved 29
       November 2008.
   15. ^ Dull, Jonathan R. (2012). American Naval History, 1607–1865:
       Overcoming the Colonial Legacy. U. of Nebraska Press. pp. 1–16.
       ISBN 978-0-8032-4471-9.
   16. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Love, Robert W., Jr. (1992). History of the US Navy.
       Volume One: 1775–1941. Harrisburg: Stackpole Books.
       ISBN 978-0-8117-1862-2.
   17. ^ ^a ^b Howarth, Steven (1991). To Shining Sea: A history of the
       United States Navy 1776–1991. New York: Random House.
       ISBN 0-394-57662-4.
   18. ^ David Stephen Heidler; Jeanne T. Heidler (2004). Encyclopedia of
       the War of 1812. Naval Institute Press. p. 218.
   19. ^ ^a ^b ^c Palmer, Michael A. "The Navy: The Continental Period,
       1775–1890". Naval History & Heritage Command. United States Navy.
       Retrieved 1 December 2008.
   20. ^ McPherson, James M. (2012). War on the Waters: The Union and
       Confederate Navies, 1861–1865. University of North Carolina Press.
       pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-0-8078-3588-3.
   21. ^ Hacker, Barton C.; Vining, Margaret (2007). American Military
       Technology. The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 53.
       ISBN 978-0-8018-8772-7.
   22. ^ O'Brien, Phillips P. (1998). British and American Naval Power:
       Politics and Policy, 1900–1936. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 7,
       154–156. ISBN 978-0-275-95898-5.
   23. ^ Holwitt, Joel I. (January 2012). "Reappraising the Interwar US
       Navy". Journal of Military History (Book review) 76 (1): 193–210.
   24. ^ Crocker III, H. W. (2006). Don't Tread on Me. New York: Crown
       Forum. p. 302. ISBN 978-1-4000-5363-6.
   25. ^ Burbach, David T.; Devore, Marc; Sapolsky, Harvey M.; Van Evera,
       Stephen (1 December 2001). "Weighing the US Navy". Defense Analysis
       17 (3): 259–265. doi:10.1080/07430170120093382. (subscription
       required (help)).
   26. ^ King, Ernest J., USN (3 December 1945). "Appendix B: Major
       Combatant Ships Added to United States Fleet, 7 December 1941 – 1
       October 1945". US Navy at War 1941–1945: Official Report to the
       Secretary of the Navy. Retrieved 8 April 2006.
   27. ^ "U.S. Navy Active Ship Force Levels, 1886–present". Naval History
       & Heritage Command. United States Navy. 10 June 2011.
   28. ^ Hone, Trent (October 2003). "The Evolution of Fleet Tactical
       Doctrine in the U.S. Navy, 1922–1941". The Journal of Military
       History (Society for Military History) 67 (4): 1107–1148.
       doi:10.1353/jmh.2003.0300. (subscription required (help)).
   29. ^ Dater, Henry M. (1950). "Tactical Use of Air Power in World War
       II: The Navy Experience". Military Affairs (Society for Military
       History) 14 (4): 192–200. doi:10.2307/1982840. (subscription
       required (help)).
   30. ^ Palmer, Michael A. "The Navy: The Transoceanic Period,
       1945–1992". Naval History & Heritage Command. United States Navy.
       Retrieved 8 April 2006.
   31. ^ Chief of Naval Operations (15 May 1991). Overview—The Role of the
       Navy. "The United States Navy in Operations "Desert Storm" /
       "Desert Shield"". Naval History & Heritage Command. United States
       Navy.
   32. ^ "Forward ... From the Sea". Department of the Navy. March 1997.
       Retrieved 25 July 2006.
   33. ^ Garamone, Jim (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New
       Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. American Forces Press
       Service. NNS071017-13.
   34. ^ Shaughnessy, Larry (29 May 2012). "US Navy: 'Hollow' force or
       'the best in the world'?". CNN.
   35. ^ Bacon, Lance M. (22 June 2010). "CNO: Global challenges need
       global responses". Navy Times. (subscription required (help)).
   36. ^ Fabey, Michael (27 January 2012). "Pentagon Sacrifices To Save
       Carrier". Aviation Week. ^[dead link]
   37. ^ Harper, Jon (22 May 2014). "Navy's top admiral: Reducing carrier
       fleet would burn out sailors, ships". www.stripes.com (Stars and
       Stripes). Retrieved 22 May 2014.
   38. ^ Sweetman, Bill (11 August 2014). "Scotland, Missile Defense And
       Subs". aviationweek.com (Penton). Retrieved 11 August 2014.
   39. ^ Navy Seeks Rail Guns, Lasers, Cruise Missiles To Improve Pacific
       Firepower – Breakingdefense.com, 20 January 2014
   40. ^ Gragg, Alan, MCS3 (24 April 2008). "Navy Reestablishes U.S.
       Fourth Fleet". Navy News Service. NNS080424-13.
   41. ^ "The shore establishment". Navy Organization. United States Navy.
       28 November 2006.
   42. ^ "Navy and Marine Corps History, Customs, and Courtesies –
       Fundamentals". Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune. United States Marine
       Corps. Archived from the original on 2012-03-14.
   43. ^ "National Security Act of 1947 (As amended 3 August 2007), (50
       U.S.C. 426)" (PDF). 26 July 1947. §606.(9) p. 69.
   44. ^ "14 USC 3. Relationship to Navy Department". Legal Information
       Institute. Cornell University Law School. Retrieved 2013-07-28.
   45. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d "Navy facilities within the U.S.". CHINFO. United
       States Navy. 2 September 2009.
   46. ^ "Naval Station Everett Official Site". Naval Station Everett.
       Archived from the original on 2005-09-09.
   47. ^ "Guam". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 19 May 2007.
   48. ^ "Naval Air Station, Agana [Tiyan]". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 19
       February 2010.
   49. ^ "Yokosuka, Japan 35°17'N 139°40'E". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 19
       April 2006.
   50. ^ "Naval facilities outside the US". United States Navy. Retrieved
       29 November 2008. ^[dead link]
   51. ^ "Ship Naming in the United States Navy". Naval History & Heritage
       Command. United States Navy. Retrieved 19 May 2007.
   52. ^ O'Rourke, Ronald. (2013). Navy Ship Names: Background For
       Congress. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
   53. ^ "CVN-65 Enterprise". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 7 March 2007.
   54. ^ "CVN-68 Nimitz Class". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 8 April 2006.
   55. ^ "Vice Adm. Barry McCullough". Defense News. ^[dead link]
   56. ^ CAVAS, CHRISTOPHER P. (9 March 2014). "US Navy Budget Plan: Major
       Questions Abound". defensenews.com. Gannett Government Media.
       Retrieved 9 March 2014.
   57. ^ Freedberg Jr., Sydney J. (11 March 2014). "Outrage On Capitol
       Hill As Navy Changes Ship-Counting Rules". breakingdefense.com.
       Breaking Media, Inc. Retrieved 11 March 2014.
   58. ^ Wolf, Jim (6 May 2010). "US Navy to Gates: Yes, we need 11
       aircraft carriers". Reuters.
   59. ^
       http://defensetech.org/2013/06/04/first-america-class-amphib-nears-
       completion/
   60. ^ Shalal-Esa, Andrea (3 June 2013). "Huntington Ingalls, General
       Dynamics win U.S. Navy orders". Reuters.
   61. ^ "FFG-7 Oliver Hazard Perry-class Program Status". GlobalSecurity.
       Retrieved 8 April 2006.
   62. ^ "Submarine Missions". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 8 April 2006.
   63. ^ "A Brief History of U.S. Navy Aircraft Carriers: Part I – The
       Early Years". The Carriers. United States Navy. Retrieved 30 June
       2011.
   64. ^ "F-35C Carrier Variant Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)".
       GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 18 July 2006.
   65. ^ "Services Deliver F-35 Initial Operational Capability Timelines
       to Congress". Navy News Service. 31 May 2013. NNS130531-06.
   66. ^ Wheeler, Winslow T. (9 March 2010). "This Pentagon Needs
       Watching". The Huffington Post.
   67. ^ "Trident Fleet Ballistic Missile". U.S. Navy Fact File. Retrieved
       8 April 2006.
   68. ^ One Hundred Ninth Congress. "Joint Resolution Recognizing
       Commodore John Barry as the first flag officer of the United States
       Navy" (PDF). Government Printing Office. Retrieved 30 June 2009.

Sources[edit]

     * "US Navy". GlobalSecurity.
     * D'Alessandro, Michael P. (ed.). "Naval Open Source Intelligence".
     * "United States Navy Official Website".
     * Lanzendörfer, Tim. "The Pacific War: The U.S. Navy".

External links[edit]

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Navy.
     * "U.S. Naval Institute".
     * A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower
     * "Navy.com, USN official recruitment site".
     * "U.S. Navy News website". ; official news
     * U.S. Navy during the Cold War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign
       Affairs Digital Archives
     * "United States Navy Memorial".
     * America's Naval Hardware – Life magazine slideshow
     * "Photographic History of The U.S. Navy". Naval History. NavSource.
     * "Haze Gray & Underway – Naval History and Photography".
       HazeGray.org.
     * "U.S. Navy Ships". Military Analysis Network. Federation of America
       Scientists.
     * "United States Navy in World War I". World War I at Sea.net.
       Retrieved 3 February 2007.  (Includes warship losses.)
     * "U.S. Navy in World War II". World War II on the World Wide Web.
       Hyper War.  (Includes The Official Chronology of the U.S. Navy in
       World War II.)
     * "Our Fighting Ships". U.S. WW II Newsmap. Army Orientation Course.
       29 June 1942.  Hosted by the UNT Libraries Digital Collections
     * "Strict Neutrality – Britain & France at War with Germany,
       September 1939 – May 1940". United States Navy and World War II.
       Naval-History.net. Archived from the original on 18 November 2006.
       Retrieved 3 February 2007.  (Chronology of the lead up of U.S.
       entry into World War II.)
     * "The National Security Strategy of the United States of America".
     * "Naval recognition-Grand Valley State University Archives and
       Special Collections".
     * "US Navy SEALs Information".
     * "US Navy SEALs Directory".
     * United States Navy at the Wayback Machine (archived January 4,
       1997)


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Navy
     * Portal Portal: United States Navy
     * Category Category: United States Navy

   Leadership
     * Secretary of the Navy
     * Under Secretary of the Navy
     * Chief of Naval Operations
     * Vice Chief of Naval Operations
     * Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
     * 4-star admirals
     * House Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces
     * Senate Subcommittee on Seapower

   Structure
     * Navy
     * Navy Reserve
     * Fleet Marine Force
     * Expeditionary Combat Command
     * Merchant Marine

     Operating
    forces

                   * Fleet Forces Command
                   * Pacific Fleet
                   * Naval Forces Europe
                   * Naval Forces Central Command
                   * Naval Forces Southern Command
                   * Naval Special Warfare Command
                   * Naval Reserve Forces
                   * Operational Test and Evaluation Force
                   * Naval Network Warfare Command
                   * Military Sealift Command

        Shore
   establishments

                   * Naval Sea Systems Command
                   * Naval Air Systems Command
                   * Naval Facilities Engineering Command
                   * Naval Supply Systems Command
                   * Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command
                   * Fleet Cyber Command
                   * Naval Academy
                   * Naval Education and Training Command
                   * Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command
                   * Office of Naval Intelligence
                   * Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center
                   * Naval Legal Service Command
                   * Naval Observatory
                   * Navy Occupational Safety & Health
                   * Bureau of Naval Personnel
                   * Bureau of Medicine and Surgery

       Fleets
                   * Third Fleet
                   * Fourth Fleet
                   * Fifth Fleet
                   * Sixth Fleet
                   * Seventh Fleet
                   * Tenth Fleet

     Structure
                   * The Pentagon
                   * Units
                   * Aircraft wings
                   * Aircraft squadrons
                   * Carrier strike group
                   * Installations
                   * Naval Observatory
                   * Master Jet Base

       Ships
                   * A–B
                   * C
                   * D–F
                   * G–H
                   * I–K
                   * L
                   * M
                   * N–O
                   * P
                   * Q–R
                   * S
                   * T–V
                   * W–Z

                   * Aircraft carriers
                   * Airships
                   * Amphibious warfare ships
                   * Auxiliaries
                   * Battleships
                   * Cruisers
                   * Destroyers
                   * Destroyer escorts
                   * Escort carriers
                   * Frigates
                   * Mine warfare vessels
                   * Monitors
                   * Patrol vessels
                   * Sailing frigates
                   * Steam frigates
                   * Steam gunboats
                   * Ships of the line
                   * Sloops of war
                   * Submarines
                   * Torpedo boats

                                  Personnel
                                      &
                                  training

   People
   Officers
          Officer insignia
          Designators

   Enlisted
          Enlisted insignia
          Ratings
          Classification

   Personnel
          Chaplain Corps (Chief of Chaplains)
          United States Navy EOD
          Medical Corps
          Dental Corps
          Nurse Corps
          Medical Service Corps
          Supply Corps
          Civil Engineer Corps
          JAG Corps (JAG)
          NCIS
          Boatswain's mates
          Hospital corpsman
          Naval Aviator
          SEALs
          Seabees
          SWCCs
          Hispanic sailors
          Training: Recruit training
          United States Naval Academy
          Officer Candidate School
          STA-21
          NROTC
          BESS
          BFTT
          CNATT
          COMPTUEX
          NAWCTSD
          AIM
          Naval Chaplaincy School
          Naval Hospital Corps School
          Naval Justice School
          Naval Postgraduate School
          Navy School of Music
          Navy Senior Enlisted Academy
          Navy Supply Corps School
          Naval War College
          Nuclear Power School
          JMTC
          TOPGUN
          USNTPS
          Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences

   Equipment
     * Uniforms
     * Awards
     * Badges
     * Current fleet
     * Reserve fleet
     * Aircraft
     * Weapons
     * Naval reactors

                                   History
                                      &
                                 traditions

     * History
     * "Anchors Aweigh"
     * Blue Angels
     * Continental Navy
     * Ensign
     * Fleet bands
     * Fleet Week
     * Jack
     * Line-crossing ceremony
     * National Museum
     * Navy Band
     * Navy Flag
     * Navy Hymn
     * Navy Memorial
     * Navy service numbers
     * Sailor's Creed
     * Ship commissioning
     * Ship decommissioning
     * USS Constitution
     * Wetting-down


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Armed Forces
     * Wikipedia book Book
     * Portal Portal
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Category Category
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
          + PHS
          + NOAA
     * Navbox
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG

   Leadership
     * Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
     * Secretary of Defense
     * Deputy Secretary of Defense
     * Joint Chiefs of Staff:
          + Chairman
          + Vice Chairman
     * United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:
          + Senate
          + House
     * Active duty four-star officers
     * Highest ranking officers in history
     * National Security Act of 1947
     * Goldwater–Nichols Act

   Organization

   Service departments
     * Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
     * Navy (Secretary)
     * Air Force (Secretary)
     * Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard

   Branches
     * Army (Chief of Staff)
     * Marine Corps (Commandant)
     * Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
     * Air Force (Chief of Staff)
     * Coast Guard (Commandant)

   Other uniformed services
     * Public Health Service Commissioned Corps (Surgeon General)
     * NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps (Director)

   Reserve components
     * Reserves:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * National Guard:
          + A
          + AF
     * State defense forces

   Civilian auxiliaries
     * Military Auxiliary Radio System
     * Merchant Marine
     * Civil Air Patrol
     * Coast Guard Auxiliary

   Unified Combatant Command
     * Northern
     * Central
     * European
     * Pacific
     * Southern
     * Africa
     * Special Operations
     * Strategic
     * Transportation

   Structure
     * United States Code
          + Title 10
          + Title 14
          + Title 32
          + Title 50
     * The Pentagon
     * Installations
     * Units:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Logistics
     * Media

   Operations and history
     * Current deployments
     * Conflicts
     * Wars
     * Timeline
     * History:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Colonial
     * World War II
     * Civil affairs
     * African Americans
     * Asian Americans
     * Jewish Americans
     * Sikh Americans
     * Historiography:
          + A: 1/2
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
     * Art:
          + A
          + AF

   Personnel
   Training
             * MEPS
             * ASVAB
             * Recruit training:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Officer candidate school:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
             * Warrant:
                  + A
                  + MC
             * Service academies:
                  + A (prep)
                  + N (prep)
                  + AF (prep)
                  + CG
                  + Merchant Marine
                  + PHS
             * Junior/Reserve Officers' Training Corps:
                  + A: MJC/SMC
                  + MC/N
                  + AF
             * Medical
             * Other education

   Uniforms
             * Uniforms:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Awards & decorations:
                  + Inter-service
                  + A
                  + MC/N
                  + AF
                  + CG
                  + PHS
                  + NOAA
                  + Foreign
                  + International
                  + Devices
             * Badges:
                  + Identification
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG

    Ranks
             * Enlisted:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Warrant officers
             * Officer:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
                  + PHS
                  + NOAA

    Other
             * Oath:
                  + Enlistment
                  + Office
             * Creeds & Codes:
                  + Code of Conduct
                  + NCO
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Service numbers:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
             * Pay
             * Uniform Code of Military Justice
             * Judge Advocate General's Corps
             * Military Health System/TRICARE
             * Separation
             * Veterans Affairs
             * Conscription
             * Chiefs of Chaplains:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG

   Equipment
     * A
     * MC:
          + vehicles
          + weapons
          + other
     * N
     * AF
     * CG

   Land
          * Individual weapons
          * Crew-served weapons
          * Vehicles (active)

    Sea
          * All watercraft
          * Ships:
               + A
               + N (active)
               + AF
               + CG
               + MSC
               + NOAA
          * Weapons:
               + N
               + CG
          * Aircraft:
               + N
               + CG
               + NOAA
          * Reactors

    Air
          * Aircraft
               + World War I
               + active
          * Aircraft designation
          * Missiles
          * Helicopter arms

   Other
          * Electronics (designations)
          * Flags:
               + A
               + MC
               + N
               + AF
               + CG
               + Ensign
               + Jack
               + Guidons
          * Food
          * WMDs:
               + Nuclear
               + Biological
               + Chemical

   Legend
          A = Army
          MC = Marine Corps
          N = Navy
          AF = Air Force
          CG = Coast Guard
          PHS = Public Health Service
          NOAA = National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
          MSC = Military Sealift Command


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Department of Defense
     * Headquarters: The Pentagon

     * Chuck Hagel, Secretary of Defense
     * Ashton Carter, Deputy Secretary of Defense



   Office of the Secretary of Defense
   (including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)

   Deputy Secretary of Defense
     * Deputy's Advisory Working Group
     * Office of Net Assessment
     * Special Access Program Oversight Committee

   Under Secretary of Defense
   for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics
     * Director, Defense Research and Engineering
     * Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
     * Missile Defense Agency
     * Defense Contract Management Agency
     * Defense Logistics Agency
     * Defense Technical Information Center
     * Defense Threat Reduction Agency
     * Office of Economic Adjustment
     * Defense Acquisition University
     * Defense Acquisition Board

   Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
     * Defense Security Cooperation Agency
     * Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office
     * Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee

   Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)
     * Defense Contract Audit Agency
     * Defense Finance and Accounting Service

   Under Secretary of Defense
   for Personnel and Readiness
     * Defense Commissary Agency
     * Department of Defense Education Activity
     * DoD Human Resources Activity
     * Military Health System
     * Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
     * Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute
     * Office of the Chancellor for Education and Professional Development

   Under Secretary of Defense
   for Intelligence
     * Defense Intelligence Agency
     * Defense Security Service
     * Defense Information Systems Agency
     * National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
     * National Reconnaissance Office
     * National Security Agency (Director)

   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
     * Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American
       Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The
       Pentagon Channel)

   General Counsel of the Department of Defense
     * Defense Legal Services Agency

   Director of Administration and Management
     * Pentagon Force Protection Agency
     * Washington Headquarters Services

   United States Department of Defense Seal

   Military Departments

   Department of the Army
     * Secretary of the Army
       The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
     * Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
     * Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
     * Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and
       Environment
     * Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
     * General Counsel of the Army
     * The Administrative Assistant
       The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
     * Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
     * Sergeant Major of the Army
     * Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
     * Chief of Chaplains
     * Judge Advocate General
     * Provost Marshal General
     * Surgeon General
       U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States
       Army

   Department of the Navy
     * Secretary of the Navy
       The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and
       Comptroller)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and
       Acquisitions)
     * General Counsel of the Navy
     * Judge Advocate General
     * Naval Criminal Investigative Service
     * Naval Inspector General
       Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
     * Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
     * Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
     * Chaplain
       U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the
       United States Marine Corps
       Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
     * Vice Chief of Naval Operations
     * Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
     * Director of Naval Reactors
     * Chief of Chaplains
     * Chief of Naval Personnel
     * Surgeon General
       United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United
       States Navy

   Department of the Air Force
     * Secretary of the Air Force
       The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management &
       Comptroller)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment &
       Logistics)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs)
     * General Counsel of the Air Force
     * Air Force Office of Special Investigations
       The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
     * Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
     * Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
     * Chief of Chaplains
     * Chief of Safety
     * Chief Scientist
     * Judge Advocate General
     * Surgeon General
       U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
     * Direct Reporting Units
     * Field Operating Agencies


   Joint Chiefs of Staff
     * Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
       Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
     * Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
     * Joint Requirements Oversight Council
     * Director of the Joint Staff
     * Joint Staff
     * National Military Command Center
     * Alternate National Military Command Center
     * National Defense University


   Combatant Commands
     * Africa Command
     * Central Command
     * European Command
     * Northern Command
     * Pacific Command
     * Southern Command
     * Special Operations Command (Joint Special Operations Command)
     * Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
     * Transportation Command


   National Guard Bureau
     * Chief of the National Guard Bureau
     * Air National Guard
     * Army National Guard


   Office of the Inspector General
     * Defense Criminal Investigative Service


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Navy&oldid=625
   536651"
   Categories:
     * 1775 establishments in the Thirteen Colonies
     * Military units and formations established in 1775
     * Uniformed services of the United States
     * United States Navy

   Hidden categories:
     * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
     * All articles with dead external links
     * Articles with dead external links from July 2013
     * Articles with dead external links from July 2011
     * Use dmy dates from July 2013
     * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
     * Articles containing Latin-language text
     * Articles with hAudio microformats
     * Articles containing potentially dated statements from September
       2014
     * All articles containing potentially dated statements
     * All accuracy disputes
     * Articles with disputed statements from July 2013
     * Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Afrikaans
     * العربية
     * Azərbaycanca
     * বাংলা
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Bosanski
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Corsu
     * Cymraeg
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Ελληνικά
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * Galego
     * 한국어
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * Latviešu
     * Lëtzebuergesch
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Occitan
     * پنجابی
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Scots
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Slovenščina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * தமிழ்
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * ייִדיש
     * 粵語
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 14 September 2014 at 16:23.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
