   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

United States Army

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
   "US divisions" redirects here. For the political divisions that make up
   the United States, see List of states and territories of the United
   States.
                           United States Army
   United States Department of the Army Seal.svg
   Department of the Army Emblem
           Active          14 June 1775 – present
                           (239 years, 3 months)^[1]^[2]
           Country          United States of America
         Allegiance        United States Constitution
            Type           Army
            Size           546,047 Active personnel
                           559,244 Reserve and National Guard personnel
                           1,105,301 total^[3]
           Part of         Department of War (1789–1947)
                           Department of the Army (1947–present)
            Motto          "This We'll Defend"
           Colors          Black, Gold
            March          "The Army Goes Rolling Along"
        Anniversaries      Army Day (14 June)
         Engagements

                           American Revolutionary War
                           Whiskey Rebellion
                           Indian Wars
                             * Northwest Indian War

                           First Barbary War
                           War of 1812
                           Patriot War
                           Mexican–American War
                           Utah War
                           Cortina Troubles
                           Reform War
                           American Civil War
                           Las Cuevas War
                           Banana Wars
                             * Spanish-American War

                           Philippine-American War
                           Boxer Rebellion
                           Border War
                           World War I
                           Russian Civil War
                           World War II
                           Puerto Rican Nationalist Revolts
                           Korean War
                           1958 Lebanon crisis
                           Operation Power Pack
                           Vietnam War
                           Operation Eagle Claw
                           Invasion of Grenada
                           Invasion of Panama
                           Persian Gulf War
                           Somali Civil War
                           Kosovo War
                           Operation Enduring Freedom
                             * Afghanistan
                             * Philippines
                             * Horn of Africa
                             * Pankisi Gorge
                             * Trans Sahara
                             * Caribbean and Central America

                           Iraq War
                           War in North-West Pakistan
                           Pakistan-United States skirmishes
                           2014 Iraq intervention
           Website         www.Army.mil
                               Commanders
          Secretary        The Honorable John M. McHugh
       Chief of Staff      Gen. Raymond T. Odierno
     Vice Chief of Staff   Gen. Dan Allyn
       Sergeant Major      SMA Raymond F. Chandler
                                Insignia
   United States Army flag Flag of the United States Army.svg
       Identification
   symbol                  US Army logo.svg

   The United States Army (USA) is the largest branch of the United States
   Armed Forces responsible for land-based military operations. It is the
   largest and oldest established branch of the U.S. military, and is one
   of seven U.S. uniformed services. The modern army has its roots in the
   Continental Army which was formed on 14 June 1775,^[4] to meet the
   demands of the American Revolutionary War before the establishment of
   the United States. The Congress of the Confederation officially created
   the United States Army on 3 June 1784^[5]^[6] after the end of the
   Revolutionary War to replace the disbanded Continental Army. The army
   considers itself to be descended from the Continental Army and thus
   dates its inception from the origins of that force.^[4]

   The primary mission of the army is "to fight and win our Nation’s wars
   by providing prompt, sustained land dominance across the full range of
   military operations and spectrum of conflict in support of combatant
   commanders."^[7] The army is a military service within the Department
   of the Army, one of the three military departments of the Department of
   Defense. The army is headed by the Secretary of the Army, and the top
   military officer in the department is the Chief of Staff of the Army.
   The highest ranking army officer is currently the Chairman of the Joint
   Chiefs of Staff. During fiscal year 2011, the Regular Army reported a
   strength of 546,057 soldiers; the Army National Guard (ARNG) reported
   358,078 and the United States Army Reserve (USAR) reported 201,166
   putting the combined component strength total at 1,105,301
   soldiers.^[3]

Contents

     * 1 Mission
     * 2 History
          + 2.1 Origins
          + 2.2 19th century
          + 2.3 20th century
          + 2.4 21st century
     * 3 Organization
          + 3.1 Army components
          + 3.2 Army commands and army service component commands
          + 3.3 Structure
          + 3.4 Regular combat maneuver organizations
          + 3.5 Special operations forces
     * 4 Personnel
          + 4.1 Commissioned officers
          + 4.2 Warrant officers
          + 4.3 Enlisted personnel
          + 4.4 Training
     * 5 Equipment
          + 5.1 Weapons
          + 5.2 Vehicles
          + 5.3 Uniforms
               o 5.3.1 Berets
          + 5.4 Tents
          + 5.5 3D printing
     * 6 Branch establishment
          + 6.1 Maneuver, Fires, and Effects Branches
          + 6.2 Maneuver Support
          + 6.3 Artillery
          + 6.4 Special Operations Forces
          + 6.5 Functional Areas
          + 6.6 Operations Support Branches
          + 6.7 Signal
          + 6.8 Military Intelligence
          + 6.9 Foreign Area Officer
          + 6.10 Functional Areas
          + 6.11 Force Sustainment Branches
          + 6.12 Logistics
          + 6.13 FSD Warrants
          + 6.14 Soldier Support
          + 6.15 Acquisition
          + 6.16 Health Services Division Branches
     * 7 See also
     * 8 References
     * 9 Further reading
     * 10 External links

Mission[edit]

   The United States Army serves as the land-based branch of the U.S.
   Armed Forces. §3062 of Title 10 US Code defines the purpose of the army
   as:^[8]^[9]
     * Preserving the peace and security and providing for the defense of
       the United States, the Commonwealths and possessions and any areas
       occupied by the United States
     * Supporting the national policies
     * Implementing the national objectives
     * Overcoming any nations responsible for aggressive acts that imperil
       the peace and security of the United States

History[edit]

   Main article: History of the United States Army
   This article or section may need to be cleaned up or summarized. This
   section has been split to History of the United States Army.

Origins[edit]

   Storming of Redoubt#10 in the Siege of Yorktown during the American
   Revolutionary War prompted the British government to begin
   negotiations, resulting in the Treaty of Paris and British recognition
   of the United States of America.

   The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the Continental
   Congress as a unified army for the colonies to fight Great Britain,
   with George Washington appointed as its commander.^[4] The army was
   initially led by men who had served in the British Army or colonial
   militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them.
   As the Revolutionary War progressed, French aid, resources, and
   military thinking influenced the new army. A number of European
   soldiers came on their own to help, such as Friedrich Wilhelm von
   Steuben, who taught the army Prussian tactics and organizational
   skills.

   The army fought numerous pitched battles and in the South 1780–81
   sometimes used the Fabian strategy and hit-and-run tactics, hitting
   where the enemy was weakest, to wear down the British forces.
   Washington led victories against the British at Trenton and Princeton,
   but lost a series of battles around New York City in 1776 and
   Philadelphia in 1777. With a decisive victory at Yorktown, and the help
   of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.

   After the war, though, the Continental Army was quickly given land
   certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the republican distrust
   of standing armies. State militias became the new nation's sole ground
   army, with the exception of a regiment to guard the Western Frontier
   and one battery of artillery guarding West Point's arsenal. However,
   because of continuing conflict with Native Americans, it was soon
   realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army. The
   Regular Army was at first very small, and after General St. Clair's
   defeat at the Battle of the Wabash, the Regular Army was reorganized as
   the Legion of the United States, which was established in 1791 and
   renamed the "United States Army" in 1796.

19th century[edit]

   General Andrew Jackson stands on the parapet of his makeshift defenses
   as his troops repulse attacking Highlanders during the defense of New
   Orleans, the final major battle of the War of 1812

   The War of 1812, the third and last American war against Britain, was
   less successful than the Revolution and Northwest Indian War had been,
   though it ended on a high note for Americans also. After the Capture of
   the British squadron on Lake Erie in 1813, the Americans were able to
   seize parts of western Upper Canada, Burn York and Defeat Tecumseh,
   which caused his Indian Confederacy to collapse. Following ending
   victories in the province of Upper Canada, which dubbed the U.S. Army
   "Regulars, by God!", British troops were able to capture and burn
   Washington, which had been abandoned by the military and government
   officials. The regular army, however, proved they were professional and
   capable of defeating the British army during the invasions of
   Plattsburgh and Baltimore, prompting British agreement on the
   previously rejected terms of a status quo ante bellum, and the
   relatively small U.S. Navy, often attached with Marines, earned most of
   the victory against the Royal Navy and Marines at sea. Two weeks after
   a treaty was signed, Andrew Jackson defeated the British in the Battle
   of New Orleans and became a national hero. Per the treaty both sides
   returned to the status quo with no victor.

   The army's major campaign against the Indians was fought in Florida
   against Seminoles. It took long wars (1818–1858) to finally defeat the
   Seminoles and move them to Oklahoma. The usual strategy in Indian wars
   was to seize control of the Indians winter food supply, but that was no
   use in Florida where there was no winter. The second strategy was to
   form alliances with other Indian tribes, but that too was useless
   because the Seminoles had destroyed all the other Indians when they
   entered Florida in the late eighteenth century.^[10]

   The U.S. Army fought and won the Mexican–American War (1846–1848),
   which was a defining event for both countries.^[11] The U.S. victory
   resulted in acquisition of territory that eventually became all or
   parts of the states of California, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Arizona,
   Wyoming and New Mexico.
   The Battle of Gettysburg, the turning point of the American Civil War

   The Civil War was the most costly war for the U.S. in terms of
   casualties. After most states in the South seceded to form the
   Confederate States of America, CSA troops opened fire on the Union-held
   Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, starting the war. Forces
   loyal to the United States were commonly called the Union Army during
   that war.

   For the first two years Confederate forces solidly defeated the U.S.
   Army, with a few exceptions.^[12] The Confederates had the advantage of
   defending a very large country in an area where disease caused twice as
   many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the
   coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river
   systems. By 1863 the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern
   armies did very well in combat, but the western armies were defeated
   one after another until New Orleans was lost in 1862 along with the
   Tennessee River, the Mississippi River was lost in 1863, and Atlanta
   fell in 1864.^[13] Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after
   a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had Lee under siege
   in Richmond. Lee lost his Confederate capital in April 1865 and was
   captured at Appomattox Court House; the other Confederate armies
   quickly surrendered.

   The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting
   in the deaths of 620,000 soldiers. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of
   all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6% in the
   North and 18% in the South.^[14]

   Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army fought a long battle against
   several western tribes of Native Americans.

   By the 1890s the U.S. saw itself as a potential international player.
   U.S. victories in the Spanish–American War and the controversial and
   less well known Philippine–American War, as well as U.S. intervention
   in Latin America and the Boxer Rebellion, gained America more land and
   power.

20th century[edit]

   Assault on a German bunker, France, circa 1918

   Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring fixed-wing aircraft.^[15] In
   1910, Mexico was having a civil war, peasant rebels fighting government
   soldiers. The army was deployed to American towns near the border to
   ensure safety to lives and property. In 1916, Pancho Villa, a major
   rebel leader, attacked Columbus, New Mexico, prompting a U.S.
   intervention in Mexico until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels
   and the Mexican federal troops until 1918. The United States joined
   World War I in 1917 on the side of Britain, France, Russia, Italy and
   other allies. U.S. troops were sent to the front and were involved in
   the push that finally broke through the German lines. With the
   armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.
   3rd battalion, 504th PIR advance in a snowstorm behind a tank, January
   1945
   American soldiers hunt Japanese infiltrators during the Bougainville
   Campaign

   The U.S. joined World War II after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
   On the European front, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of
   the forces that captured North Africa and Sicily. On D-Day and in the
   subsequent liberation of Europe and defeat of Nazi Germany, millions of
   U.S. Army troops played a central role. In the Pacific, U.S. Army
   soldiers participated alongside U.S. Marines in capturing the Pacific
   Islands from Japanese control. Following the Axis surrenders in May
   (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to
   Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after
   World War II, the Army Air Forces separated from the army to become the
   United States Air Force in September 1947 after decades of attempting
   to separate. Also, in 1948, the army was desegregated by order of
   President Harry S. Truman.

   The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation
   known as the Cold War. With the outbreak of the Korean War, concerns
   over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, V and VII, were
   reactivated under Seventh United States Army in 1950 and American
   strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of
   thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with
   others in Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, until the
   1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack.
   U.S. Army soldiers look upon an Atomic bomb test of Operation
   Buster-Jangle at the Nevada Test Site during the Korean War

   During the Cold War, American troops and their allies fought Communist
   forces in Korea and Vietnam. The Korean War began in 1950, when the
   Soviets walked out of a U.N. Security meeting, removing their possible
   veto. Under a United Nations umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S.
   troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea,
   and later, to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and
   retreats by both sides, and the PRC People's Volunteer Army's entry
   into the war, the Korean Armistice Agreement returned the peninsula to
   the status quo in 1953.

   The Vietnam War is often regarded^[by whom?] as a low point for the
   army due to the use of drafted personnel, the unpopularity of the war
   with the American public, and frustrating restrictions placed on the
   military by American political leaders. While American forces had been
   stationed in the Republic of Vietnam since 1959, in intelligence &
   advising/training roles, they did not deploy in large numbers until
   1965, after the Gulf of Tonkin Incident. American forces effectively
   established and maintained control of the "traditional" battlefield,
   however they struggled to counter the guerrilla hit and run tactics of
   the communist Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army. On a tactical
   level, American soldiers (and the U.S. military as a whole) did not
   lose a sizable battle.^[16]
   A U.S. Army infantry patrol moves up to assault the last North
   Vietnamese Army position at Dak To, South Vietnam during Operation
   Hawthorne

   During the 1960s the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the
   reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as
   well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the Army
   National Guard and the Army Reserve.^[17] In 1967 Secretary of Defense
   McNamara decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard
   were unnecessary and cut the number to 8 divisions (1 mechanized
   infantry, 2 armored, and 5 infantry), but increased the number of
   brigades from 7 to 18 (1 airborne, 1 armored, 2 mechanized infantry,
   and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not set well with the
   states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix
   for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating
   divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the
   proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state
   of the division base. No reduction, however, in total Army National
   Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to
   accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly
   between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.
   M1 Abrams move out before the Battle of Al Busayyah during the Gulf War

   The Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army
   General Creighton Abrams in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and
   involves treating the three components of the army – the Regular Army,
   the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve as a single force.^[18]
   Believing that no U.S. president should be able to take the United
   States (and more specifically the U.S. Army) to war without the support
   of the American people, General Abrams intertwined the structure of the
   three components of the army in such a way as to make extended
   operations impossible, without the involvement of both the Army
   National Guard and the Army Reserve.^[19]

   The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The army converted to
   an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training and
   technology. The Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986 created unified combatant
   commands bringing the army together with the other four military
   services under unified, geographically organized command structures.
   The army also played a role in the invasions of Grenada in 1983
   (Operation Urgent Fury) and Panama in 1989 (Operation Just Cause).
   U.S. Army soldiers prepare to take La Comandancia in the El Chorrillo
   neighborhood of Panama City during the United States invasion of Panama

   By 1989 Germany was nearing reunification and the Cold War was coming
   to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction
   in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans
   to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.^[20] A
   number of incentives such as early retirement were used. In 1990 Iraq
   invaded its smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and U.S. land forces, quickly
   deployed to assure the protection of Saudi Arabia. In January 1991
   Operation Desert Storm commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed
   over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to
   drive out Iraqi forces. The campaign ended in total victory, as Western
   coalition forces routed the Iraqi Army, organized along Soviet lines,
   in just one hundred hours.

   After Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat
   operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a
   number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense
   issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force
   Policy,^[21] but in 2004, Air War College scholars concluded the
   guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential
   ingredient to the successful application of military force."^[22]

21st century[edit]

   Army Rangers from the 1st Ranger Battalion conduct a MOUT exercise at
   Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
   Army Rangers take part in a raid during operation in Nahr-e Saraj,
   Afghanistan

   After the September 11 attacks, and as part of the Global War on
   Terror, U.S. and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan in 2001, displacing
   the Taliban government.

   The U.S. Army led the combined U.S. and allied Invasion of Afghanistan
   in 2001, and Iraq in 2003. In the following years the mission changed
   from conflict between regular militaries to counterinsurgency,
   resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S service members (as of
   March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.^[23]^[24] 23,813
   insurgents^[25] were killed in Iraq between 2003–2011. The lack of
   stability in the theater of operations has led to longer deployments
   for Regular Army as well as Reserve and Guard troops.^[citation needed]

   The army's chief modernization plan was the FCS program. Many systems
   were canceled and the remaining were swept into the BCT modernization
   program.^[citation needed] In response to Budget sequestration in 2013
   the army is planned to shrink to a size not seen since the WWII
   buildup.^[26] The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and
   acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15, to $21
   billion for FY15 expected in 2014.^[27]

Organization[edit]

   Main article: Structure of the United States Army
   organization chart^[28]

Army components[edit]

   The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.^[29] In the
   first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was
   maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and
   perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction
   works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much
   larger United States Volunteers which were raised independently by
   various state governments. States also maintained full-time militias
   which could also be called into the service of the army.
   U.S. general officers, World War II, Europe

   By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S.
   Volunteers on four separate occasions during each of the major wars of
   the nineteenth century. During World War I, the "National Army" was
   organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S.
   Volunteers.^[30] It was demobilized at the end of World War I, and was
   replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps, and the
   State Militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were
   known as the "Regular Army" with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and
   "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.^[31]

   In 1941, the "Army of the United States" was founded to fight World War
   II. The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard,
   and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed
   simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into
   the United States Army Reserve. The Army of the United States was
   re-established for the Korean War and Vietnam War and was demobilized
   upon the suspension of the draft.^[31]

   Currently, the army is divided into the Regular Army, the Army Reserve,
   and the Army National Guard.^[30] The army is also divided into major
   branches such as Air Defense Artillery, Infantry, Aviation, Signal
   Corps, Corps of Engineers, and Armor. Before 1903 members of the
   National Guard were considered state soldiers unless federalized (i.e.,
   activated) by the President. Since the Militia Act of 1903 all National
   Guard soldiers have held dual status: as National Guardsmen under the
   authority of the governor of their state or territory and, when
   activated, as a reserve of the U.S. Army under the authority of the
   President.

   Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the
   Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role
   in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took
   part in the Gulf War, peacekeeping in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and the 2003
   invasion of Iraq.

Army commands and army service component commands[edit]

   Army commands Current commander Location of headquarters
   United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM) GEN Mark A. Milley Ft.
   Bragg, NC
   United States Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) GEN David G.
   Perkins Ft. Eustis, VA
   United States Army Materiel Command (AMC) GEN Dennis L. Via Redstone
   Arsenal, AL
   Army service component commands Current commander Location of
   headquarters
   United States Army Africa (USARAF) / Ninth US Army^[32] MG Patrick R.
   Donahue Vicenza, Italy
   United States Army Central (ARCENT) / Third US Army LTG James L. Terry
   Shaw AFB, SC
   United States Army North (ARNORTH) / Fifth US Army LTG Perry L. Wiggins
   Joint Base San Antonio, TX
   United States Army South (ARSOUTH) / Sixth US Army MG Joseph P. DiSalvo
   Joint Base San Antonio, TX
   United States Army Europe (USAREUR) / Seventh Army (US) LTG Donald M.
   Campbell, Jr. Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden, Germany
   United States Army Pacific (USARPAC) GEN Vincent K. Brooks Ft. Shafter,
   HI
   United States Army Special Operations Command (USASOC) LTG Charles T.
   Cleveland Ft. Bragg, NC
   Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC) MG Thomas
   J.Richardson^[33] Scott AFB, IL
   United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command/ Army Strategic
   Command (USASMDC/ARSTRAT) LTG David Mann Redstone Arsenal, AL
   Field army headquarters Current commander Location of headquarters
   Eighth Army (EUSA) LTG Bernard S. Champoux Yongsan Garrison, South
   Korea
   Direct reporting units Current commander Location of headquarters
   United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM) LTG Patricia D. Horoho
   Joint Base San Antonio, TX
   United States Army Intelligence and Security Command (INSCOM) MG
   Stephen G. Fogarty Ft. Belvoir, VA
   United States Army Criminal Investigation Command (USACIDC) MG David E.
   Quantock Quantico, VA
   United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) LTG Thomas P. Bostick
   Washington, D.C.
   United States Army Military District of Washington (MDW) MG Jeffrey S.
   Buchanan Ft. McNair, Washington, D.C.
   United States Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) MG Peter D. Utley
   Alexandria, VA
   United States Military Academy (USMA) LTG Robert L. Caslen West Point,
   NY
   United States Army Reserve Command (USARC) LTG Jeffrey W. Talley Ft.
   Bragg, NC
   United States Army Installation Management Command (IMCOM) LTG Michael
   Ferriter Joint Base San Antonio, TX
   United States Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER)^[34]^[35] / Second US Army
   LTG Edward Cardon Ft. Belvoir, VA

   Source: U.S. Army organization^[36]

Structure[edit]

   Main article: Transformation of the United States Army

   The United States Army is made up of three components: the active
   component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army
   National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are
   primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month, known
   as battle assemblies or unit training assemblies (UTAs), and conduct
   two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army
   and the Army Reserve are organized under Title 10 of the United States
   Code, while the National Guard is organized under Title 32. While the
   Army National Guard is organized, trained and equipped as a component
   of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the
   command of individual state and territorial governors; the District of
   Columbia National Guard, however, reports to the U.S. President, not
   the district's mayor, even when not federalized. Any or all of the
   National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the
   governor's wishes.^[37]
   Graphic legend of Army Transformation

   The army is led by a civilian Secretary of the Army, who has the
   statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the
   authority, direction and control of the Secretary of Defense.^[38] The
   Chief of Staff of the Army, who is the highest-ranked military officer
   in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive
   agent for the Secretary of the Army, i.e. its service chief; and as a
   member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body composed of the service
   chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the
   Department of Defense who advise the President of the United States,
   the Secretary of Defense, and the National Security Council on
   operational military matters, under the guidance of the Chairman and
   Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.^[39]^[40] In 1986, the
   Goldwater-Nichols Act mandated that operational control of the services
   follows a chain of command from the President to the Secretary of
   Defense directly to the unified combatant commanders, who have control
   of all armed forces units in their geographic or function area of
   responsibility. Thus, the secretaries of the military departments (and
   their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the
   responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components.
   The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as
   directed by the Secretary of Defense.^[41]
   The 1st Cavalry Division's combat aviation brigade performs a mock
   charge with the horse detachment
   Soldiers from the 6th Infantry Regiment taking up positions on a street
   corner during a foot patrol in Ramadi, Iraq

   Through 2013, the army is shifting to six geographical commands that
   will line up with the six geographical unified combatant commands
   (COCOM):
     * United States Army Central headquartered at Shaw Air Force Base,
       South Carolina
     * United States Army North headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
     * United States Army South headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
     * United States Army Europe headquartered at Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden,
       Germany
     * United States Army Pacific headquartered at Fort Shafter, Hawaii
     * United States Army Africa headquartered at Vicenza, Italy

   U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers from the 3rd Special Forces Group
   patrol a field in the Gulistan district of Farah, Afghanistan

   The army is also changing its base unit from divisions to brigades.
   When finished, the active army will have increased its combat brigades
   from 33 to 48, with similar increases in the National Guard and Reserve
   forces. Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional
   headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades
   that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is
   that each brigade will be modular, i.e. all brigades of the same type
   will be exactly the same, and thus any brigade can be commanded by any
   division. There will be three major types of ground combat brigades:
     * Armor brigades will have around 3,700 troops and be equivalent to a
       mechanized infantry or tank brigade.
     * Stryker brigades will have around 3,900 troops and be based on the
       Stryker family of vehicles.
     * Infantry brigades will have around 3,300 troops and be equivalent
       to a light infantry or airborne brigade.

   In addition, there are combat support and service support modular
   brigades. Combat support brigades include aviation (CAB) brigades,
   which will come in heavy and light varieties, fires (artillery)
   brigades, and battlefield surveillance brigades. Combat service support
   brigades include sustainment brigades and come in several varieties and
   serve the standard support role in an army.

Regular combat maneuver organizations[edit]

   The U.S. Army currently consists of 10 active divisions as well as
   several independent units. The force is in the process of contracting
   after several years of growth. In June 2013, the Army announced plans
   to downsize to 32 active combat brigade teams by 2015 to match a
   reduction in active duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. The Army has yet
   to announce cuts to its supporting structure, and many observers think
   the Army will eventually shrink to around 400,000 active duty
   troops.^[27]^[42]

   Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve there are
   a further eight divisions, over fifteen maneuver brigades, additional
   combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent
   cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer, and support
   battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all
   psychological operations and civil affairs units.
   Name Headquarters Subunits
   1st US Armored Division SSI.svg
   1st Armored Division Fort Bliss, TX 1st Stryker BCT, 2nd & 4th Armored
   BCTs, 3rd Infantry BCT (Light), and Combat Aviation Brigade (CAB). 3rd
   BCT scheduled for inactivation^[43]
   1 Cav Shoulder Insignia.svg
   1st Cavalry Division Fort Hood, TX 1st, 2nd, & 3rd Armored BCTs, & CAB.
   1st US Infantry Division.svg 1st Infantry Division Fort Riley, KS 1st &
   2nd Armored BCTs, 4th Infantry BCT (Light), & CAB at Fort Riley; 3rd
   Infantry BCT (Light) at Fort Knox, Kentucky. 3rd & 4th BCT scheduled
   for inactivation
   2 Infantry Div SSI.svg
   2nd Infantry Division Camp Red Cloud, S. Korea 1st Armored BCT at Camp
   Casey & CAB at Camp Humphreys, South Korea; 2nd & 3rd Stryker BCTs at
   Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington under 7th Infantry Division.
   3 Infantry Div SSI.svg
   3rd Infantry Division Fort Stewart, GA 1st & 2nd Armored BCTs, & 4th
   Infantry BCT (Light) at Fort Stewart, Georgia; 3rd Armored BCT at Fort
   Benning, Georgia, & CAB at Hunter Army Airfield, Georgia. 2nd BCT
   scheduled for inactivation
   4 Infantry Division SSI.svg
   4th Infantry Division Fort Carson, CO 1st SBCT, 2nd and 3rd Armored
   BCTs, & 4th Infantry BCT (Light). CAB scheduled for activation in
   2013–2014. 2nd BCT scheduled for inactivation
   10th Mountain Division SSI.svg
   10th Mountain Division Fort Drum, NY 1st, 2nd, 3rd Infantry BCTs
   (Light), & CAB at Fort Drum; 4th Infantry BCT (Light) at Fort Polk,
   Louisiana. 3rd BCT scheduled for inactivation
   25th Infantry Division SSI.svg
   25th Infantry Division Schofield Barracks, HI 1st Stryker BCT at Fort
   Wainwright, Alaska; 2nd Stryker BCT & 3rd Infantry BCT (Light) at
   Schofield Barracks; CAB at Wheeler Army Airfield, Hawaii; & 4th
   Infantry BCT (Airborne) at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Alaska.
   82 ABD SSI.svg
   82nd Airborne Division Fort Bragg, NC 1st, 2nd, & 3rd Infantry BCTs
   (Airborne), & CAB.
   US 101st Airborne Division patch.svg
   101st Airborne Division Fort Campbell, KY 1st, 2nd & 3rd Infantry BCTs
   (Air Assault), & 101st, 159th CABs.
   173Airborne Brigade Shoulder Patch.png
   173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team Vicenza, Italy Infantry BCT
   (Airborne): 2 airborne infantry battalions in Vicenza. 1 cavalry
   squadron in Schweinfurt, Germany. 1 special troops battalion, 1
   airborne field artillery battalion & 1 support battalion at Warner
   Barracks in Bamberg, Germany.
   US 2nd Cavalry Regiment SSI.jpg
   2nd Cavalry Regiment Vilseck, Germany Stryker BCT: 6 squadrons: 1st,
   2nd & 3rd (Stryker Infantry), 4th (RSTA), Fires Squadron (3x6 155 mm
   towed artillery), & Regimental Support Squadron; 5 troops: Regimental
   HQ, Military Intelligence, Signal, Engineer & Anti-Armor.
   3dACRSSI.PNG
   3d Cavalry Regiment Fort Hood, TX Stryker BCT: 6 squadrons: 1st, 2nd &
   3rd (Stryker Infantry), 4th (RSTA), Fires Squadron (3x6 155 mm towed
   artillery), & Regimental Support Squadron; 5 troops: Regimental HQ,
   Military Intelligence, Signal, Engineer & Anti-Armor.
   11th Armored Cavalry Regiment SSI.png
   11th Armored Cavalry Regiment Fort Irwin, CA Armored Cavalry Regiment:
   Two Combined Arms squadrons (each with two Mechanized Infantry Troops
   and two Armor Troops) and one support squadron augmented by an Army
   National Guard field artillery battalion and reconnaissance squadron.
   Also serves as Opposing Force (OPFOR) at National Training Center
   (NTC).

Special operations forces[edit]

   US Army Special Operations Command SSI.svg US Army Special Operations
   Command (Airborne) (USASOC):
   Name Headquarters Structure and purpose
   US Army Special Forces SSI.png
   Special Forces Command (Airborne)"Green Berets" Ft. Bragg, NC The
   command manages seven groups (five Regular Army, two Army National
   Guard) capable of unconventional warfare, foreign internal defense,
   special reconnaissance, direct action, and counter-terrorism.
   JFKSWCS SSI.gif
   John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School Ft. Bragg, NC
   Selection & training for Special Forces, Civil Affairs & Military
   Information Support Operations Soldiers.
   75 Ranger Regiment Shoulder Sleeve Insignia.svg
   75th Ranger Regiment "Rangers" Ft. Benning, GA Three maneuver
   battalions and one special troops battalion of elite airborne infantry
   specializing in direct action raids and airfield seizures.
   US Army Special Operations Aviation Command SSI.png
   Army Special Operations Aviation Command Ft. Bragg, NC Organizes, mans,
   trains, resources and equips Army special operations aviation units to
   provide responsive, special operations aviation support to Special
   Operations Forces (SOF), including the 160th Special Operations
   Aviation Regiment (Airborne).
   US Army Special Operations Command SSI.svg
   Military Information Support Operations Command (Airborne)
   (Provisional) Ft. Bragg, NC Performs psychological operations via two
   operational groups, the 4th Military Information Support Group and 8th
   Military Information Support Group, and one independent battalion, the
   3rd Military Information Support Battalion (Airborne), that supports
   media production and dissemination.
   95CivilAffairsBdeSSI.jpg
   95th Civil Affairs Brigade (Airborne) Ft. Bragg, NC Enables military
   commanders and U.S. Ambassadors to improve relationships with various
   stakeholders in a local area to meet the objectives of the U.S.
   government via five operational battalions.
   528sb.jpg
   528th Sustainment Brigade, Special Operations (Airborne) Ft. Bragg, NC
   Provides combat service support and combat health support units for all
   USASOC elements.
   US Army Special Operations Command SSI.svg
   1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta "Delta Force" Ft.
   Bragg, NC Elite special operations & counter-terrorism unit under the
   control of Joint Special Operations Command.

Personnel[edit]

   Main articles: Ranks and Insignia of NATO, United States Army officer
   rank insignia and United States Army enlisted rank insignia

   These are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their
   equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently
   holds the rank of General of the Army, it is still authorized by
   Congress for use in wartime.

Commissioned officers[edit]

   Main article: Commissioned Officers

   There are several paths to becoming a commissioned officer^[44]
   including the United States Military Academy, Reserve Officers'
   Training Corps, and Officer Candidate School. Regardless of which road
   an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions,
   including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers, and chaplains are
   commissioned directly into the army and are designated by insignia
   unique to their staff community.

   Most army commissioned officers are promoted based on an "up or out"
   system. The Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980
   establishes rules for timing of promotions and limits the number of
   officers that can serve at any given time.

   Army regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of
   general as 'General (last name)' regardless of the number of stars.
   Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as
   'Colonel (last name)' and first and second lieutenants as 'Lieutenant
   (last name).'^[45]
   US DoD Pay Grade O-1 O-2 O-3 O-4 O-5 O-6 O-7 O-8 O-9 O-10 Special
   Special
   Insignia US-O1 insignia.svg US-O2 insignia.svg US-O3 insignia.svg US-O4
    insignia.svg US-O5 insignia.svg US-O6 insignia.svg US-O7 insignia.svg
      US-O8 insignia.svg US-O9 insignia.svg US-O10 insignia.svg US-O11
                           insignia.svg 6 Star.svg
                                Title Second
                              Lieutenant First
                     Lieutenant Captain Major Lieutenant
                          Colonel Colonel Brigadier
                                General Major
                             General Lieutenant
                       General General General of the
               Army General of the Armies of the United States
           Abbreviation 2LT 1LT CPT MAJ LTC COL BG MG LTG GEN GA -
       NATO Code OF-1 OF-2 OF-3 OF-4 OF-5 OF-6 OF-7 OF-8 OF-9 OF-10 -
   Note: General of the Army is reserved for wartime.^[46]

Warrant officers[edit]

   Main article: Warrant officers

   Warrant officers^[44] are single track, specialty officers with subject
   matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as
   warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the Secretary of the Army, but
   receive their commission upon promotion to chief warrant officer two
   (CW2).

   By regulation, warrant officers are addressed as 'Mr. (last name)' or
   'Ms. (last name).'^[45] However, many personnel address warrant
   officers as 'Chief (last name)'. Enlisted soldiers say "sir" or "ma'am"
   when addressing them.
   US DoD pay grade W-1 W-2 W-3 W-4 W-5
          Insignia US-Army-WO1.svg US-Army-CW2.svg US-Army-CW3.svg
                       US-Army-CW4.svg US-Army-CW5.svg
   Title Warrant Officer 1 Chief Warrant Officer 2 Chief Warrant Officer 3
               Chief Warrant Officer 4 Chief Warrant Officer 5
                      Abbreviation WO1 CW2 CW3 CW4 CW5
                     NATO Rank WO-1 WO-2 WO-3 WO-4 WO-5

Enlisted personnel[edit]

   Main article: Enlisted personnel

   Sergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for
   non-commissioned officers.^[44]^[47] This distinguishes corporals from
   the more numerous specialists, who have the same pay grade but do not
   exercise leadership responsibilities.

   Privates (E1 and E2) and privates first class (E3) are addressed as
   'Private (last name)', specialists as 'Specialist (last name),
   corporals as 'Corporal (last name)', and sergeants, staff sergeants,
   sergeants first class, and master sergeants all as 'Sergeant (last
   name).' First sergeants are addressed as 'First Sergeant (last name)'
   and sergeants major as 'Sergeant Major (last name)'.^[45]
   US DoD Pay grade E-1 E-2 E-3 E-4 E-5 E-6 E-7 E-8 E-9
         Insignia No Insignia Army-USA-OR-02.svg Army-USA-OR-03.svg
         Army-USA-OR-04b.svg Army-USA-OR-04a.svg Army-USA-OR-05.svg
          Army-USA-OR-06.svg Army-USA-OR-07.svg Army-USA-OR-08b.svg
         Army-USA-OR-08a.svg Army-USA-OR-09c.svg Army-USA-OR-09b.svg
                             Army-USA-OR-09a.svg
                        Title Private Private Private
               First Class Specialist Corporal Sergeant Staff
                              Sergeant Sergeant
                             First Class Master
                               Sergeant First
                              Sergeant Sergeant
                                Major Command
                        Sergeant Major Sergeant Major
                                 of the Army
  Abbreviation PV1 ¹ PV2 ¹ PFC SPC ² CPL SGT SSG SFC MSG 1SG SGM CSM SMA
    NATO Code OR-1 OR-2 OR-3 OR-4 OR-4 OR-5 OR-6 OR-7 OR-8 OR-8 OR-9 OR-9
                                    OR-9
   ¹ PVT is also used as an abbreviation for both private ranks when pay
   grade need not be distinguished.^[48]
   ² SP4 is sometimes encountered instead of SPC for specialist. This is a
   holdover from when there were additional specialist ranks at pay grades
   E-5 to E-7.

Training[edit]

   Rangers practice fast roping techniques from an MH-47 during an
   exercise at Fort Bragg

   Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories –
   individual and collective. Basic training consists of 10 weeks for most
   recruits followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they
   receive training for their military occupational specialties (MOS).
   Some individuals MOSs range anywhere from 14–20 weeks of One Station
   Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length
   of AIT school varies by the MOS The length of time spent in AIT depends
   on the MOS of the soldier, and some highly technical MOS training may
   require many months (e.g. foreign language translators). Depending on
   the needs of the army, Basic Combat Training for combat arms soldiers
   is conducted at a number of locations, but two of the longest-running
   are the Armor School and the Infantry School, both at Fort Benning,
   Georgia.

   Following their basic and advanced training, soldiers may choose to
   continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier"
   (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide ranging MOS and focus it
   into a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are
   to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training
   to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a
   licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, ASI training
   includes pre-commissioning training either at USMA, via ROTC, or by
   completing OCS. After commissioning, officers undergo branch specific
   training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course, (formerly called Officer
   Basic Course), which varies in time and location according their future
   assignments. Further career development is available through the Army
   Correspondence Course Program.
   Marksmanship training

   Collective training takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the
   most intensive is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC);
   the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin, California, the Joint
   Readiness Training Center (JRTC) at Fort Polk, Louisiana, and the Joint
   Multinational Training Center (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in
   Hohenfels, Germany. ARFORGEN is the Army Force Generation process
   approved in 2006 to meet the need to continuous replenish forces for
   deployment, at unit level, and for other echelons as required by the
   mission.

Equipment[edit]

   Main article: Equipment of the United States Army

Weapons[edit]

   Lockheed Martin Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system used
   by the army for ballistic missile protection

   Individual weapons

   The army employs various individual weapons to provide light firepower
   at short ranges. The most common weapons used by the army are the
   compact variant of the M16 rifle, the M4 carbine,^[49] as well as the
   7.62x51 mm variant of the FN SCAR for Army Rangers. The primary sidearm
   in the U.S. Army is the 9 mm M9 pistol.^[50]

   Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons,
   including the M249 SAW (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive
   fire at the fire-team level.^[51] Indirect fire is provided by the M203
   grenade launcher. The M1014 Joint Service Combat Shotgun or the
   Mossberg 590 Shotgun are used for door breaching and close-quarters
   combat. The M14EBR is used by long-range marksmen, and the M107 Long
   Range Sniper Rifle, the M24 Sniper Weapon System, and the M110
   Semi-Automatic Sniper Rifle are used by snipers. Hand grenades, such as
   the M67 fragmentation grenade and M18 smoke grenade, are also used.
   3rd Infantry Division soldiers manning an M1A1 Abrams in Iraq

   Crew served weapons

   The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower
   at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.

   The M240 is the US Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.^[52] The M2
   heavy machine gun is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun.
   In the same way, the 40 mm MK 19 grenade machine gun is mainly used by
   motorized units.^[53]

   The US Army uses three types of mortar for indirect fire support when
   heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of
   these is the 60 mm M224, normally assigned at the infantry company
   level.^[54] At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are
   typically supported by a section of 81 mm M252 mortars.^[55] The
   largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120 mm M120/M121, usually
   employed by mechanized units.^[56]

   Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers,
   including the 105 mm M119A1^[57] and the 155 mm M777 (which will
   replace the M198).^[58]

   The US Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to
   provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The AT4 is an unguided
   projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500
   meters. The FIM-92 Stinger is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking
   anti-aircraft missile. The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank
   guided missiles.

Vehicles[edit]

   Humvee

   The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose
   Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the Humvee, which is capable
   of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform, and ambulance,
   among many other roles.^[59] While they operate a wide variety of
   combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the
   family of HEMTT vehicles. The M1A2 Abrams is the army's main battle
   tank,^[60] while the M2A3 Bradley is the standard infantry fighting
   vehicle.^[61] Other vehicles include the Stryker,^[62] and the M113
   armored personnel carrier,^[63] and multiple types of Mine Resistant
   Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.

   The Pentagon bought 25,000 MRAP vehicles since 2007 in 25 variants
   through rapid acquisition with no long-term plans for the platforms.
   The Army plans to divest 7,456 vehicles and retain 8,585. Of the total
   number of vehicles the Army will keep, 5,036 will be put in storage,
   1,073 will be used for training, and the remaining will be spread
   across the active force. The Oshkosh M-ATV will be kept the most at
   5,681 vehicles, as it is smaller and lighter than other MRAPs for
   off-road mobility. The other most retained vehicle will be the Navistar
   MaxxPro Dash with 2,633 vehicles, plus 301 Maxxpro ambulances.
   Thousands of other MRAPs like the Cougar, BAE Caiman, and larger
   MaxxPros will be disposed of.^[64]

   The U.S. Army's principal artillery weapons are the M109A6 Paladin
   self-propelled howitzer^[65] and the M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System
   (MLRS),^[66] both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy
   mechanized units.

   While the U.S. Army operates a few fixed-wing aircraft, it mainly
   operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the AH-64
   Apache attack helicopter,^[67] the OH-58D Kiowa Warrior armed
   reconnaissance/light attack helicopter,^[68] the UH-60 Black Hawk
   utility tactical transport helicopter,^[69] and the CH-47 Chinook
   heavy-lift transport helicopter.^[70]

   Fixed wing aircraft used by the US Army are for non-front line combat
   and light transport roles. The army relies on the United States Air
   Force for airlift capabilities.

Uniforms[edit]

   Main article: Uniforms of the United States Army

   The Army Combat Uniform, or ACU, currently features a digital Universal
   Camouflage Pattern (UCP) and is designed for use in woodland, desert,
   and urban environments. However, Soldiers operating in Afghanistan are
   being issued a fire-resistant ACU with the "MultiCam" pattern,
   officially known as Operation Enduring Freedom Camouflage Pattern or
   "OCP".^[71]
   The Ranger Honor Platoon marching in dress uniform.

   The standard garrison service uniform is known as Army Greens or
   Class-As and has been worn by all officers and enlisted personnel since
   its introduction in 1956 when it replaced earlier olive drab (OD) and
   khaki (and tan worsted or TW) uniforms worn between the 1950s and 1985.
   The Army Blue uniform, dating back to the mid-19th century, is
   currently the Army's formal dress uniform, but in 2013, it replaced the
   Army Green, and in 2014 it will replace the Army White uniform (a
   uniform similar to the Army Green uniform, but worn in tropical
   postings) and will become the new Army Service Uniform, which will
   function as both a garrison uniform (when worn with a white shirt and
   necktie) and a dress uniform (when worn with a white shirt and either a
   necktie for parades or a bow tie for after six or black tie events).

Berets[edit]

   The Army black beret (having been permanently replaced with the patrol
   cap) is no longer worn with the new ACU for garrison duty. After years
   of complaints that it wasn't suited well for most work conditions, Army
   Chief of Staff General Martin Dempsey eliminated it for wear with the
   ACU in June 2011. Soldiers may still wear colored berets who are
   currently in an airborne unit (maroon beret), Rangers (tan beret), and
   Special Forces (green beret) and may wear it with the Army Service
   Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct
   the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or
   motor pools.

Tents[edit]

   Main article: Tent
   A DRASH maintenance facility in Iraq.

   The army has relied heavily on tents to provide the various facilities
   needed while on deployment. The most common tent uses for the military
   are as temporary barracks (sleeping quarters), DFAC buildings (dining
   facilities), forward operating bases (FOBs), after action review (AAR),
   tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR)
   facilities, and security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents
   are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems
   Center.

   The U.S. military is beginning to use a more modern tent called the
   deployable rapid assembly shelter or DRASH. In 2008, DRASH became part
   of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.^[72]

3D printing[edit]

   In November 2012 the United States Army developed a tactical 3D
   printing capability to allow it to rapidly manufacture critical
   components on the battlefield. (BBC)

Branch establishment[edit]

   The U.S. Army was officially founded on 14 June 1775, when the
   Continental Congress authorized enlistment of riflemen to serve the
   United Colonies for one year. Each branch of the army has a different
   branch insignia.

Maneuver, Fires, and Effects Branches[edit]

   Maneuver
     * Infantry, 14 June 1775

   Ten companies of riflemen were authorized by a resolution of the
   Continental Congress on 14 June 1775. However, the oldest Regular Army
   infantry regiment, the 3rd Infantry Regiment, was constituted on 3 June
   1784, as the First American Regiment.
     * Armor, 12 June 1776

   The Armor Branch traces its origin to the Cavalry. A regiment of
   cavalry was authorized to be raised by the Continental Congress Resolve
   of 12 December 1776. Although mounted units were raised at various
   times after the Revolution, the first in continuous service was the
   United States Regiment of Dragoons, organized in 1833. The Tank Service
   was formed on 5 March 1918. The Armored Force was formed on 10 July
   1940. Armor became a permanent branch of the army in 1950.
     * Aviation, 12 April 1983

   Following the establishment of the U.S. Air Force as a separate service
   in 1947, the army began to develop further its own aviation assets
   (light planes and rotary wing aircraft) in support of ground
   operations. The Korean War gave this drive impetus, and the war in
   Vietnam saw its fruition, as army aviation units performed a variety of
   missions, including reconnaissance, transport, and fire support. After
   the war in Vietnam, the role of armed helicopters as tank destroyers
   received new emphasis. In recognition of the growing importance of
   aviation in army doctrine and operations, aviation became a separate
   branch on 12 April 1983.

Maneuver Support[edit]

     * Corps of Engineers, 16 June 1775

   Continental Congress authority for a "Chief Engineer for the Army"
   dates from 16 June 1775. A corps of engineers for the United States was
   authorized by the Congress on 11 March 1789. The Corps of Engineers as
   it is known today came into being on 16 March 1802, when the President
   was authorized to "organize and establish a Corps of Engineers ... that
   the said Corps ... shall be stationed at West Point in the State of New
   York and shall constitute a Military Academy." A Corps of Topographical
   Engineers, authorized on 4 July 1838, was merged with the Corps of
   Engineers on March 1863.
     * Chemical Corps, 28 June 1918

   The Chemical Warfare Service was established on 28 June 1918, combining
   activities that until then had been dispersed among five separate
   agencies of government. It was made a permanent branch of the Regular
   Army by the National Defense Act of 1920. In 1945, it was re-designated
   the Chemical Corps.
     * Military Police Corps, 26 September 1941

   A Provost Marshal General's Office and Corps of Military Police were
   established in 1941. Prior to that time, except during the Civil War
   and World War I, there was no regularly appointed Provost Marshal
   General or regularly constituted Military Police Corps, although a
   "Provost Marshal" can be found as early as January 1776, and a "Provost
   Corps" as early as 1778.

Artillery[edit]

     * Field Artillery, 17 November 1775

   The Continental Congress unanimously elected Henry Knox "Colonel of the
   Regiment of Artillery" on 17 November 1775. The regiment formally
   entered service on 1 January 1776.
     * Air Defense Artillery, 20 June 1968

   The Air Defense Artillery branch descended from the Anti-Aircraft
   Artillery (part of the U.S. Army Coast Artillery Corps) into a separate
   branch on 20 June 1968.

Special Operations Forces[edit]

     * Special Forces, 9 April 1987

   The first special forces unit in the Army was formed on 11 June 1952,
   when the 10th Special Forces Group was activated at Fort Bragg, North
   Carolina. A major expansion of special forces occurred during the
   1960s, with a total of eighteen groups organized in the Regular Army,
   Army Reserve, and Army National Guard. As a result of renewed emphasis
   on special operations in the 1980s, the Special Forces Branch was
   established as a basic branch of the army effective 9 April 1987, by
   General Order No. 35, 19 June 1987. Special forces are part of U.S.
   special operations forces
     * Civil Affairs Corps, 16 October 2006

   The Civil Affairs/Military Government Branch in the Army Reserve Branch
   was established as a special branch on 17 August 1955. Subsequently
   redesignated the Civil Affairs Branch on 2 October 1955, it has
   continued its mission to provide guidance to commanders in a broad
   spectrum of activities ranging from host-guest relationships to the
   assumption of executive, legislative, and judicial processes in
   occupied or liberated areas. Became a basic branch effective 16 October
   2006 per General Order 29, on 12 January 2007.
     * Psychological Operations, 16 October 2006

   Established as a basic branch effective 16 October 2006 per General
   Order 30, 12 January 2007.

Functional Areas[edit]

     * FA30-Information Operations
     * FA46-Public Affairs

Operations Support Branches[edit]

Signal[edit]

     * Signal Corps, 21 June 1860

   The Signal Corps was authorized as a separate branch of the army by act
   of Congress on 3 March 1863. However, the Signal Corps dates its
   existence from 21 June 1860, when Congress authorized the appointment
   of one signal officer in the army, and a War Department order carried
   the following assignment: "Signal Department – Assistant Surgeon Albert
   J. Myer to be Signal Officer, with the rank of Major, 27 June 1860, to
   fill an original vacancy."
     * FA24-Telecomm Systems Engineer
     * FA53-Info Systems Management

Military Intelligence[edit]

     * Military Intelligence Corps, 1 July 1962

   Intelligence has been an essential element of army operations during
   war as well as during periods of peace. In the past, requirements were
   met by personnel from the Army Intelligence and Army Security Reserve
   branches, two-year obligated tour officers, one-tour levies on the
   various branches, and Regular Army officers in the specialization
   programs. To meet the army's increased requirement for national and
   tactical intelligence, an Intelligence and Security Branch was
   established effective 1 July 1962, by General Order No. 38, on 3 July
   1962. On 1 July 1967, the branch was re-designated as Military
   Intelligence.
     * FA34-Strategic Intel

Foreign Area Officer[edit]

     * FA48-Foreign Area Officer

Functional Areas[edit]

     * FA29-Electronic Warfare
     * FA40-Space Ops
     * FA47-Academy Professor
     * FA49-Ops Research & Systems Analysis
     * FA50-Force Management
     * FA52-Nuclear and Counter Proliferation
     * FA57-Simulation Ops
     * FA59-Strategist

Force Sustainment Branches[edit]

Logistics[edit]

     * Quartermaster Corps, 16 June 1775

   The Quartermaster Corps, originally designated the Quartermaster
   Department, was established on 16 June 1775. While numerous additions,
   deletions, and changes of function have occurred, its basic supply and
   service support functions have continued in existence.
     * Ordnance Corps, 14 May 1812

   The Ordnance Department was established by act of Congress on 14 May
   1812. During the Revolutionary War, ordnance material was under
   supervision of the Board of War and Ordnance. Numerous shifts in duties
   and responsibilities have occurred in the Ordnance Corps since colonial
   times. It acquired its present designation in 1950. Ordnance soldiers
   and officers provide maintenance and ammunition support.
     * Transportation Corps, 31 July 1942

   The history of the Transportation Corps starts with World War I. Prior
   to that time, transportation operations were chiefly the responsibility
   of the Quartermaster General. The Transportation Corps, essentially in
   its present form, was organized on 31 July 1942. The Transportation
   Corps is headquartered at Fort Lee, Virginia.^[73]
     * Logistics, 1 January 2008

   Established by General Order 6, 27 November 2007. Consists of
   multi-functional logistics officers in the rank of captain and above,
   drawn from the Ordnance, Quartermaster and Transportation Corps.

FSD Warrants[edit]

     * Warrant Officers

Soldier Support[edit]

     * Adjutant General's Corps, 16 June 1775

   The post of Adjutant General was established 16 June 1775, and has been
   continuously in operation since that time. The Adjutant General's
   Department, by that name, was established by the act of 3 March 1812,
   and was re-designated the Adjutant General's Corps in 1950.
     * Finance Corps, 16 June 1775

   The Finance Corps is the successor to the old Pay Department, which was
   created in June 1775. The Finance Department was created by law on 1
   July 1920. It became the Finance Corps in 1950.

   Professional Service Branches
     * Chaplain Corps, 29 July 1775

   The legal origin of the Chaplain Corps is found in a resolution of the
   Continental Congress, adopted 29 July 1775, which made provision for
   the pay of chaplains. The Office of the Chief of Chaplains was created
   by the National Defense Act of 1920.
     * Judge Advocate General's Corps, 29 July 1775

   The Office of Judge Advocate of the army may be deemed to have been
   created on 29 July 1775, and has generally paralleled the origin and
   development of the American system of military justice. The Judge
   Advocate General Department, by that name, was established in 1884. Its
   present designation as a corps was enacted in 1948.

Acquisition[edit]

     * Acquisition

Health Services Division Branches[edit]

     * Army Medical Department, 27 July 1775

   The Army Medical Department and the Medical Corps trace their origins
   to 27 July 1775, when the Continental Congress established the army
   hospital headed by a "Director General and Chief Physician." Congress
   provided a medical organization of the army only in time of war or
   emergency until 1818, which marked the inception of a permanent and
   continuous Medical Department. The Army Organization Act of 1950
   renamed the Medical Department as the Army Medical Service. In June
   1968, the Army Medical Service was re-designated the Army Medical
   Department. The Medical Department has the following branches:

          + Medical Corps, 27 July 1775
          + Army Nurse Corps, 2 February 1901
          + Dental Corps, 3 March 1911
          + Veterinary Corps, 3 June 1916
          + Medical Service Corps, 30 June 1917
          + Army Medical Specialist Corps, 16 April 1947

See also[edit]

   Portal icon United States Army portal
   Portal icon Military of the United States portal
     * America's Army (Video games for recruitment)
     * Army National Guard
     * Comparative military ranks
     * History of the US Army
     * List of active United States military aircraft
     * List of former United States Army medical units
     * Officer Candidate School (United States Army)
     * ROTC / JROTC
     * Timeline of United States military operations
     * Transformation of the United States Army
     * U.S. Army Regimental System
     * United States Military Academy
     * United States Army Basic Training
     * United States Army Center of Military History
     * U.S. Soldier's Creed
     * United States Volunteers
     * Vehicle markings of the United States military
     * Warrant Officer Candidate School (United States Army)

References[edit]

    1. ^ Wright, Jr., Robert K. (1983). The Continental Army (Army Lineage
       Series). Washington, DC: Center of Military History, United States
       Army. ISBN 9780160019319. OCLC 8806011.
    2. ^ Maass, John R. "June 14th: The Birthday of the U.S. Army". U.S.
       Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 30 October 2013.
    3. ^ ^a ^b Department of the Army, Deputy Chief of Staff (Human
       Resources/G-1), "Army Demographics – FY12 Army Profile"
       (demographics brochure)
    4. ^ ^a ^b ^c "14 June: The Birthday of the U.S. Army". United States
       Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 1 July 2011.  an excerpt
       from Robert Wright, The Continental Army
    5. ^ Library of Congress, Journals of the Continental Congress, Volume
       27
    6. ^ Army Birthdays. United States Army Center of Military History. 15
       November 2004. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010.
       Retrieved Jun 2010
    7. ^ The United States Army |Organization
    8. ^ DA Pamphlet 10-1 Organization of the United States Army; Figure
       1.2 Military Operations.
    9. ^ "10 USC 3062: Policy; composition; organized peace
       establishment". US House of Representatives. Retrieved 21 Aug 13.
       Check date values in: |accessdate= (help)
   10. ^ Ron Field and Richard Hook, The Seminole Wars 1818–58 (2009)
   11. ^ "The US-Mexican War (1846–1848)" PBS.org
   12. ^ McPherson, James M., ed. "The Atlas of the Civil War",
       (Philadelphia, PA, 2010)
   13. ^ McPherson, James M., ed. The Atlas of the Civil War
       (Philadelphia, 2010)
   14. ^ Maris Vinovskis (1990). "Toward a social history of the American
       Civil War: exploratory essays". Cambridge University Press. p. 7.
       ISBN 0-521-39559-3
   15. ^ Cragg, Dan, ed., The Guide to Military Installations, Stackpole
       Books, Harrisburg, 1983, p. 272.
   16. ^ Woodruff, Mark. Unheralded Victory: The Defeat of the Viet Cong
       and the North Vietnamese Army 1961–1973 (Arlington, VA: Vandamere
       Press, 1999).
   17. ^ Wilson, John B. (1997). Maneuver and Firepower: The Evolution of
       Divisions and Separate Brigades. Washington, DC: Center of Military
       History, Chapter XII, for references see Note 48.
   18. ^ Army National Guard Constitution
   19. ^ Carafano, James, Total Force Policy and the Abrams Doctrine:
       Unfulfilled Promise, Uncertain Future, Foreign Policy Research
       Institute, 3 February 2005.
   20. ^ An Army at War: Change in the Midst of Conflict, p. 515, via
       Google Books
   21. ^ Section 1101, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Years
       1990 and 1991, Department of Defense Interim Report to Congress,
       September 1990. (See "rebalancing" as used in finance.)
   22. ^ Downey, Chris, The Total Force Policy and Effective Force, Air
       War College, 19 March 2004.
   23. ^ John Pike, ed. (2006). "U.S. Casualties in Iraq" (web page). The
       Lancet (GlobalSecurity.org, published 4 September 2007) 368 (9545):
       1421–1428. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69491-9. PMID 17055943.
       Archived from the original on 5 September 2007. Retrieved 16
       January 2012
   24. ^ The Human Cost of the War in Iraq: A Mortality Study,
       2002–2006 PDF (603 KB). By Gilbert Burnham, Shannon Doocy,
       Elizabeth Dzeng, Riyadh Lafta, and Les Roberts. A supplement to the
       second Lancet study.
   25. ^ 597 killed in 2003,[1], 23,984 killed from 2004 through 2009
       (with the exceptions of May 2004 and March 2009), [2] 652 killed in
       May 2004, [3] 45 killed in March 2009, [4] 676 killed in 2010, [5]
       451 killed in 2011 (with the exception of February),[6] [7] [8] [9]
       [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] thus giving a total of 26,405 dead.
   26. ^ SHANKER, THOM; COOPER, HELENE (23 February 2014). "Pentagon Plans
       to Shrink Army to Pre-World War II Level". www.nytimes.com. The New
       York Times Company. Retrieved 23 February 2014.
   27. ^ ^a ^b Drwiega, Andrew. "Missions Solutions Summit: Army Leaders
       Warn of Rough Ride Ahead" Rotor&Wing, June 4, 2014. Accessed: June
       8, 2014.
   28. ^ DA Pam 10-1 Organization of the United States Army; Figure 1-1.
       '"Army Organizations Execute Specific Functions and Assigned
       Missions"
   29. ^ Organization of the United States Army: America's Army 1775 –
       1995, DA PAM 10–1. Headquarters, Department of the Army,
       Washington, 14 June 1994.
   30. ^ ^a ^b Finnegan, John Patrick; Romana Danysh (1998). "Chapter 2:
       World War I". In Jeffrey J. Clarke. Military Intelligence. Army
       Lineage Series. Washington, D.C., United States: Center of Military
       History United States Army. online. ISBN 0-16-048828-1.
       OCLC 35741383
   31. ^ ^a ^b Pullen, Randy (23 April 2008). "Army Reserve Marks First
       100 Years" (online article). defencetalk.com (DefenceTalk).
       Archived from the original on 24 April 2008. Retrieved 8 August
       2008
   32. ^ http://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/pdf/go1204.pdf
   33. ^ "Commanding General". United States Army, Surface Deployment and
       Distribution Command. 7 September 2010. Retrieved 26 February
       2012.
   34. ^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1026.pdf
   35. ^ Army establishes CYBER Command
   36. ^ Organization, United States Army
   37. ^ Perpich v. Department of Defense, 496 U.S. 334 (1990)
   38. ^ 10 U.S.C. 3013
   39. ^ 10 U.S.C. 3033
   40. ^ 10 U.S.C. 151
   41. ^ 10 U.S.C. 162
   42. ^ http://www.g2mil.com/armyfat.htm
   43. ^ "Army to cut 10 BCTs, reorganize the rest | Army Times".
       armytimes.com. Retrieved 2013-07-10.
   44. ^ ^a ^b ^c From the Future Soldiers Web Site.
   45. ^ ^a ^b ^c Army Regulation 600-20
   46. ^ U.S. Department of Defense site, "Officer Rank Insignia
   47. ^ From the Enlisted Soldiers Descriptions Web Site.
   48. ^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/r600_20.pdf
   49. ^ M4. U.S. Army Fact Files
   50. ^ M9 pistol. U.S. Army Fact Files
   51. ^ M249, U.S. Army Fact Files
   52. ^ M240, U.S. Army Fact Files
   53. ^ MK 19, U.S. Army Fact Files
   54. ^ M224, U.S. Army Fact Files
   55. ^ M252, U.S. Army Fact Files
   56. ^ M120, U.S. Army Fact Files
   57. ^ M119, U.S. Army Fact Files
   58. ^ M777 Lightweight 155 mm howitzer (LW155)
   59. ^ HMMWV, U.S. Army Fact Files
   60. ^ Abrams, U.S. Army Fact Files
   61. ^ Bradley, United States Army Fact Files
   62. ^ Stryker, U.S. Army Fact Files
   63. ^ M113, U.S. Army Fact Files
   64. ^ Majority of MRAPs to be scrapped or stored - Militarytimes.com, 5
       January 2014
   65. ^ Paladin, Army.mil
   66. ^ MLRS, U.S. Army Fact Files
   67. ^ Apache, U.S. Army Fact Files
   68. ^ Kiowa, U.S. Army Fact Files
   69. ^ Blackhawk, U.S. Army Fact Files
   70. ^ Chinook, U.S. Army Fact Files
   71. ^ Lopez, C. (20 February 2010). "Soldiers to get new cammo pattern
       for wear in Afghanistan". US Army. US Army. Retrieved 22 February
       2010.
   72. ^ NG, DHS Technologies to support SICPS/TMSS United Press
       International
   73. ^ "Transportation School at Fort Lee prepares for first students |
       Article | The United States Army". Army.mil. 2010-09-17. Retrieved
       2013-07-10.

Further reading[edit]

     * Bluhm, Jr,, Raymond K. (Editor-in-Chief); Andrade, Dale; Jacobs,
       Bruce; Langellier, John; Newell, Clayton R.; Seelinger, Matthew
       (2004). U.S. Army: A Complete History (Beaux Arts ed.). Arlington,
       VA: The Army Historical Foundation. p. 744.
       ISBN 978-0-88363-640-4.
     * Kretchik, Walter E. U.S. Army Doctrine: From the American
       Revolution to the War on Terror (University Press of Kansas; 2011)
       392 pages; studies military doctrine in four distinct eras:
       1779–1904, 1905–1944, 1944–1962, and 1962 to the present.

External links[edit]

   Find more about United States Army at Wikipedia's sister projects
   Search Wiktionary Definitions and translations from Wiktionary
   Search Commons Media from Commons
   Search Wikiquote Quotations from Wikiquote
   Search Wikisource Source texts from Wikisource
   Search Wikibooks Textbooks from Wikibooks
   Search Wikiversity Learning resources from Wikiversity
     * Army.mil – United States Army official website
     * GoArmy.com – official recruiting site
     * U.S. Army Collection – Missouri History Museum
     * Finding Aids for researching the US Army (compiled by the United
       States Army Center of Military History)
     * US-militaria.com – The US Army during the second world war
     *  This article incorporates public domain material from the United
       States Army Center of Military History document "Army Birthdays".


     * v
     * t
     * e

    United States Army
   Leadership
     * Secretary of the Army
     * Under Secretary of the Army
     * Chief of Staff
     * Vice Chief of Staff
     * 4-star generals
     * Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer
     * Sergeant Major of the Army
     * House Armed Services Committee (House Subcommittee on Air and Land
       Forces)
     * Senate Committee on Armed Services (Senate Subcommittee on Air and
       Land Forces)

   Components and
   commands
     * Regular Army
     * Army Reserve
     * Army National Guard
     * Active Units

       Army commands
                           * Forces
                           * Training and Doctrine
                           * Materiel

     Service components
                           * Africa
                           * Central
                           * Europe
                           * Pacific
                           * North
                           * South
                           * Special Operations
                           * Surface Deployment and Distribution
                           * Space and Missile Defense

   Direct reporting units
                           * Network Enterprise Technology
                           * Medical
                           * Intelligence and Security
                           * Criminal Investigation
                           * Corps of Engineers
                           * Military District of Washington
                           * Test and Evaluation
                           * Military Academy
                           * Reserve
                           * Acquisition Support Center
                           * Installation Management

        Field armies
                           * First
                           * Second
                           * Third
                           * Fifth
                           * Sixth
                           * Seventh
                           * Eighth
                           * Ninth

          Branches
                           * Acquisition Corps
                           * Adjutant General's Corps
                           * Air Defense Artillery Branch
                           * Armor Branch
                           * Aviation Branch
                           * Army Band
                           * Chaplain Corps
                           * Chemical Corps
                           * Civil Affairs Corps
                           * Corps of Engineers
                           * Dental Corps
                           * Field Artillery Corps
                           * Finance Corps
                           * Infantry Branch
                           * Inspector General's Corps
                           * Judge Advocate General's Corps
                           * Logistics Branch
                           * Medical Corps
                           * Medical Service Corps
                           * Medical Specialist Corps
                           * Military Intelligence Corps
                           * Military Police Corps
                           * Nurse Corps
                           * Ordnance Corps
                           * Psychological Operations
                           * Quartermaster Corps
                           * Signal Corps
                           * Special Forces
                           * Transportation Corps
                           * Veterinary Corps

   Installations
     * The Pentagon
     * United States and Overseas
     * Germany
     * Kosovo
     * Kuwait
     * South Korea

   Training
     * Basic Training
     * BOLC
     * OCS
     * WOBC
     * WOCS
     * West Point
     * MOS

   Uniforms and insignia
     * Awards and decorations
     * Badges
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Air Defense Artillery Regiments
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Armor Regiments
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Army Aviation Regiments
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Artillery Regiments
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Cavalry Regiments
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Engineer Battalions
     * Coats of arms of U.S. Infantry Regiments
     * Branch
     * Officer
     * Warrant
     * Enlisted
     * Uniforms

   Equipment
     * Individual weapons
     * Crew-served weapons
     * Vehicles

   History and traditions
     * History
     * Continental Army
     * National Army
     * Army of the United States
     * United States Army Air Forces
     * Center of Military History
     * Institute of Heraldry
     * America's Army
     * Army Art Program
     * Army Band
     * Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps
     * Flag
     * National Museum
     * Rangers
     * U.S. Army Regimental System
     * Soldier's Creed
     * The Army Goes Rolling Along
     * Draft
     * Service numbers

     * Category Category
     * Portal Portal


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States Armed Forces
     * Wikipedia book Book
     * Portal Portal
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Category Category
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
          + PHS
          + NOAA
     * Navbox
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG

   Leadership
     * Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
     * Secretary of Defense
     * Deputy Secretary of Defense
     * Joint Chiefs of Staff:
          + Chairman
          + Vice Chairman
     * United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:
          + Senate
          + House
     * Active duty four-star officers
     * Highest ranking officers in history
     * National Security Act of 1947
     * Goldwater–Nichols Act

   Organization

   Service departments
     * Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
     * Navy (Secretary)
     * Air Force (Secretary)
     * Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard

   Branches
     * Army (Chief of Staff)
     * Marine Corps (Commandant)
     * Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
     * Air Force (Chief of Staff)
     * Coast Guard (Commandant)

   Other uniformed services
     * Public Health Service Commissioned Corps (Surgeon General)
     * NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps (Director)

   Reserve components
     * Reserves:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * National Guard:
          + A
          + AF
     * State defense forces

   Civilian auxiliaries
     * Military Auxiliary Radio System
     * Merchant Marine
     * Civil Air Patrol
     * Coast Guard Auxiliary

   Unified Combatant Command
     * Northern
     * Central
     * European
     * Pacific
     * Southern
     * Africa
     * Special Operations
     * Strategic
     * Transportation

   Structure
     * United States Code
          + Title 10
          + Title 14
          + Title 32
          + Title 50
     * The Pentagon
     * Installations
     * Units:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Logistics
     * Media

   Operations and history
     * Current deployments
     * Conflicts
     * Wars
     * Timeline
     * History:
          + A
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
          + CG
     * Colonial
     * World War II
     * Civil affairs
     * African Americans
     * Asian Americans
     * Jewish Americans
     * Sikh Americans
     * Historiography:
          + A: 1/2
          + MC
          + N
          + AF
     * Art:
          + A
          + AF

   Personnel
   Training
             * MEPS
             * ASVAB
             * Recruit training:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Officer candidate school:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
             * Warrant:
                  + A
                  + MC
             * Service academies:
                  + A (prep)
                  + N (prep)
                  + AF (prep)
                  + CG
                  + Merchant Marine
                  + PHS
             * Junior/Reserve Officers' Training Corps:
                  + A: MJC/SMC
                  + MC/N
                  + AF
             * Medical
             * Other education

   Uniforms
             * Uniforms:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Awards & decorations:
                  + Inter-service
                  + A
                  + MC/N
                  + AF
                  + CG
                  + PHS
                  + NOAA
                  + Foreign
                  + International
                  + Devices
             * Badges:
                  + Identification
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG

    Ranks
             * Enlisted:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Warrant officers
             * Officer:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
                  + PHS
                  + NOAA

    Other
             * Oath:
                  + Enlistment
                  + Office
             * Creeds & Codes:
                  + Code of Conduct
                  + NCO
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Service numbers:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG
             * Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
             * Pay
             * Uniform Code of Military Justice
             * Judge Advocate General's Corps
             * Military Health System/TRICARE
             * Separation
             * Veterans Affairs
             * Conscription
             * Chiefs of Chaplains:
                  + A
                  + MC
                  + N
                  + AF
                  + CG

   Equipment
     * A
     * MC:
          + vehicles
          + weapons
          + other
     * N
     * AF
     * CG

   Land
          * Individual weapons
          * Crew-served weapons
          * Vehicles (active)

    Sea
          * All watercraft
          * Ships:
               + A
               + N (active)
               + AF
               + CG
               + MSC
               + NOAA
          * Weapons:
               + N
               + CG
          * Aircraft:
               + N
               + CG
               + NOAA
          * Reactors

    Air
          * Aircraft
               + World War I
               + active
          * Aircraft designation
          * Missiles
          * Helicopter arms

   Other
          * Electronics (designations)
          * Flags:
               + A
               + MC
               + N
               + AF
               + CG
               + Ensign
               + Jack
               + Guidons
          * Food
          * WMDs:
               + Nuclear
               + Biological
               + Chemical

   Legend
          A = Army
          MC = Marine Corps
          N = Navy
          AF = Air Force
          CG = Coast Guard
          PHS = Public Health Service
          NOAA = National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
          MSC = Military Sealift Command


     * v
     * t
     * e

   Department of Defense
     * Headquarters: The Pentagon

     * Chuck Hagel, Secretary of Defense
     * Ashton Carter, Deputy Secretary of Defense



   Office of the Secretary of Defense
   (including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)

   Deputy Secretary of Defense
     * Deputy's Advisory Working Group
     * Office of Net Assessment
     * Special Access Program Oversight Committee

   Under Secretary of Defense
   for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics
     * Director, Defense Research and Engineering
     * Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
     * Missile Defense Agency
     * Defense Contract Management Agency
     * Defense Logistics Agency
     * Defense Technical Information Center
     * Defense Threat Reduction Agency
     * Office of Economic Adjustment
     * Defense Acquisition University
     * Defense Acquisition Board

   Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
     * Defense Security Cooperation Agency
     * Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office
     * Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee

   Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)
     * Defense Contract Audit Agency
     * Defense Finance and Accounting Service

   Under Secretary of Defense
   for Personnel and Readiness
     * Defense Commissary Agency
     * Department of Defense Education Activity
     * DoD Human Resources Activity
     * Military Health System
     * Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
     * Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute
     * Office of the Chancellor for Education and Professional Development

   Under Secretary of Defense
   for Intelligence
     * Defense Intelligence Agency
     * Defense Security Service
     * Defense Information Systems Agency
     * National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
     * National Reconnaissance Office
     * National Security Agency (Director)

   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
     * Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American
       Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The
       Pentagon Channel)

   General Counsel of the Department of Defense
     * Defense Legal Services Agency

   Director of Administration and Management
     * Pentagon Force Protection Agency
     * Washington Headquarters Services

   United States Department of Defense Seal

   Military Departments

   Department of the Army
     * Secretary of the Army
       The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
     * Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
     * Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
     * Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and
       Environment
     * Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
     * General Counsel of the Army
     * The Administrative Assistant
       The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
     * Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
     * Sergeant Major of the Army
     * Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
     * Chief of Chaplains
     * Judge Advocate General
     * Provost Marshal General
     * Surgeon General
       U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States
       Army

   Department of the Navy
     * Secretary of the Navy
       The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and
       Comptroller)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and
       Acquisitions)
     * General Counsel of the Navy
     * Judge Advocate General
     * Naval Criminal Investigative Service
     * Naval Inspector General
       Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
     * Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
     * Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
     * Chaplain
       U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the
       United States Marine Corps
       Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
     * Vice Chief of Naval Operations
     * Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
     * Director of Naval Reactors
     * Chief of Chaplains
     * Chief of Naval Personnel
     * Surgeon General
       United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United
       States Navy

   Department of the Air Force
     * Secretary of the Air Force
       The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management &
       Comptroller)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment &
       Logistics)
     * Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs)
     * General Counsel of the Air Force
     * Air Force Office of Special Investigations
       The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
     * Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
     * Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
     * Chief of Chaplains
     * Chief of Safety
     * Chief Scientist
     * Judge Advocate General
     * Surgeon General
       U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
     * Direct Reporting Units
     * Field Operating Agencies


   Joint Chiefs of Staff
     * Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
       Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
     * Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
     * Joint Requirements Oversight Council
     * Director of the Joint Staff
     * Joint Staff
     * National Military Command Center
     * Alternate National Military Command Center
     * National Defense University


   Combatant Commands
     * Africa Command
     * Central Command
     * European Command
     * Northern Command
     * Pacific Command
     * Southern Command
     * Special Operations Command (Joint Special Operations Command)
     * Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
     * Transportation Command


   National Guard Bureau
     * Chief of the National Guard Bureau
     * Air National Guard
     * Army National Guard


   Office of the Inspector General
     * Defense Criminal Investigative Service


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject

   ‹ The template below (Link FA) is being considered for deletion. See
   templates for discussion to help reach a consensus.›

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Army&oldid=625
   877437"
   Categories:
     * United States Army
     * Uniformed services of the United States
     * Military units and formations established in 1775
     * 1775 establishments in the Thirteen Colonies

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles with inconsistent citation formats
     * CS1 errors: dates
     * Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March
       2012
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012
     * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011
     * Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Army
       Center of Military History
     * Use dmy dates from October 2012

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Afrikaans
     * العربية
     * বাংলা
     * Беларуская
     * Български
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Corsu
     * Cymraeg
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * Gaeilge
     * ગુજરાતી
     * 한국어
     * Hrvatski
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * ಕನ್ನಡ
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * Lietuvių
     * Македонски
     * മലയാളം
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * پنجابی
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Scots
     * Shqip
     * Sicilianu
     * Simple English
     * Slovenščina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * தமிழ்
     * తెలుగు
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * ייִדיש
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 16 September 2014 at 23:19.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
