   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) alternate copyright Wikipedia
   Atom feed

Vice President of the United States

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to: navigation, search
                       Vice President of the
   United States of America and President of the Senate
   US Vice President Seal.svg
   Vice Presidential seal
   US Vice President Flag.svg
   Vice Presidential standard
   Biden 2013.jpg
   Incumbent
   Joe Biden
   since January 20, 2009
   Office of the Vice President
            Style          Mr. Vice President
                           (Informal)
                           The Honorable
                           (Formal)
                           Mr. President
                           (When presiding over Senate)
                           His Excellency
                           (Diplomatic, outside the U.S.)
          Member of        Cabinet
                           National Security Council
          Residence        Number One Observatory Circle
            Seat           Washington, D.C., U.S.
          Appointer        Electoral College
         Term length       Four years
   Constituting instrument U. S. Constitution
          Formation        March 4, 1789
        First holder       John Adams
                           (April 21, 1789)
         Succession        First
                           in the presidential line of succession
           Salary          $230,700 Annually
           Website         Vice President Joe Biden

                   United States
   Great Seal of the United States (obverse).svg
   This article is part of a series on the
   politics and government of
   the United States
   Federal government
     * Constitution
     * Law
     * Taxation

   Legislature
     * Congress
          + House
               o Speaker
               o Party leaders
               o Congressional districts
          + Senate
               o President pro tempore
               o Party leaders

   Executive
     * President
     * Vice President
     * Cabinet
     * Federal agencies

   Judiciary
     * Supreme Court
     * Courts of Appeals
     * District Courts
     * Other tribunals

   Elections
     * Presidential elections
     * Midterm elections
     * Off-year elections

   Political parties
     * Democratic
     * Republican
     * Third parties

   Federalism
     * State government
          + Governors
          + Legislatures (List)
          + State courts
     * Local government

     * Other countries
     * Atlas

   Portal icon Politics portal
     * v
     * t
     * e


   This article is part of a series on the
                          United States Senate
   Great Seal of the United States Senate
   History of the United States Senate
                                 Members
     * Current members
          + (by seniority
          + by age
          + by class)
     * Former members
     * Hill committees
          + (DSCC
          + NRSC)
     __________________________________________________________________

     * U.S. Vice President
     * President pro tempore (list)
     * Presiding officer
     __________________________________________________________________

     * Party leaders / Assistants
     * Party leadership of
       the United States Senate
     * Democratic Caucus
     * Republican Conference

                         Politics and procedure
     * Advice and consent
     * Closed session (list)
     *
          + Cloture
          + Committees (list)
     *
          + Executive session
          + Morning business
     *
          + Filibuster
          + Quorum
          + Quorum call
     *
          + Recess appointment
          + Salaries
     *
          + Saxbe fix
          + Seal
          + Holds
     *
          + Senatorial courtesy
          + Standing Rules
     *
          + Traditions
          + Unanimous consent
     * Vice Presidents' tie-breaking votes

                                 Places
     * United States Capitol
     * Senate chamber
     * Senate office buildings
          + (Dirksen
          + Hart
          + Russell)

     * v
     * t
     * e

   The Vice President of the United States (VPOTUS) is the second-highest
   public office created by the United States Constitution.^[1] ^[2] The
   Vice President, together with the President of the United States, is
   indirectly elected by the people through the Electoral College to a
   four-year term of office.^[3] The Vice President is the first person in
   the presidential line of succession, and would ascend to the Presidency
   upon the death, resignation, or removal of the President.^[4]

   The Vice President is also President of the United States Senate.^[5]
   In that capacity, he is allowed to vote in the Senate when necessary to
   break a tie. While Senate customs have created supermajority rules that
   have diminished this Constitutional power, the Vice President still
   retains the ability to influence legislation (e.g. the Deficit
   Reduction Act of 2005).^[5]^[6]^[7] Pursuant to the Twelfth Amendment,
   the Vice President presides over the joint session of Congress when it
   convenes to count the vote of the Electoral College.^[3]

   While the Vice President's only constitutionally prescribed functions
   aside from Presidential succession relate to his role as President of
   the Senate, the office is commonly viewed as a component of the
   executive branch of the federal government. The United States
   Constitution does not expressly assign the office to any one branch,
   causing a dispute amongst scholars whether it belongs to the executive
   branch, the legislative branch, or both.^[8]^[9]^[10]^[11] The modern
   view of the Vice President as a member of the executive branch is due
   in part to the assignment of executive duties to the Vice President by
   either the President or Congress, though such activities are only
   recent historical developments.^[8]

Contents

     * 1 Origin
     * 2 Roles of the Vice President
          + 2.1 President of the United States Senate
               o 2.1.1 Regular duties
               o 2.1.2 Recurring, infrequent duties
          + 2.2 Succession and the Twenty-Fifth Amendment
          + 2.3 Informal roles
               o 2.3.1 Office as stepping stone to the Presidency
     * 3 Selection process
          + 3.1 Eligibility
          + 3.2 Disqualifications
               o 3.2.1 Residency limitation
          + 3.3 Nominating process
          + 3.4 Election, oath, and tenure
               o 3.4.1 Original election process and reform
          + 3.5 Salary
          + 3.6 Vacancy
     * 4 Growth of the office
     * 5 Post–Vice Presidency
     * 6 Timeline of Vice Presidents
     * 7 See also
     * 8 Notes and references
     * 9 Further reading
     * 10 External links

Origin[edit]

   The creation of the office of Vice President was a direct consequence
   of the Electoral College. Delegates to the Philadelphia Convention gave
   each state a number of presidential electors equal to that state's
   combined share of House and Senate seats. Yet the delegates were
   worried that each elector would only favor his own state's favorite son
   candidate, resulting in deadlocked elections that would produce no
   winners. To counter this potential difficulty, the delegates gave each
   presidential elector two votes, requiring that at least one of their
   votes be for a candidate from outside the elector's state; they also
   mandated that the winner of an election must obtain an absolute
   majority of the total number of electors. The delegates expected that
   each elector's second vote would go to a statesman of national
   character.^[12]

   Fearing that electors might throw away their second vote to bolster
   their favorite son's chance of winning, however, the Philadelphia
   delegates specified that the runner-up would become Vice President.
   Creating this new office imposed a political cost on discarded votes
   and forced electors to cast their second ballot.^[12]

Roles of the Vice President[edit]

   The Constitution limits the formal powers and role of Vice President to
   becoming President, should the President become unable to serve,
   prompting the well-known expression "only a heartbeat away from the
   Presidency", and to acting as the presiding officer of the U.S. Senate.

   Other statutorily granted roles include membership of both the National
   Security Council and the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian
   Institution.^[13]^[14]

President of the United States Senate[edit]

   As President of the Senate, the Vice President has two primary duties:
   to cast a vote in the event of a Senate deadlock and to preside over
   and certify the official vote count of the U.S. Electoral College. For
   example, in the first half of 2001, the Senators were divided 50-50
   between Republicans and Democrats and Dick Cheney's tie-breaking vote
   gave the Republicans the Senate majority.

Regular duties[edit]

   As President of the Senate (Article I, Section 3, Clause 4), the Vice
   President oversees procedural matters and may cast a tie-breaking vote.
   There is a strong convention within the U.S. Senate that the Vice
   President should not use his position as President of the Senate to
   influence the passage of legislation or act in a partisan manner,
   except in the case of breaking tie votes. As President of the Senate,
   John Adams cast twenty-nine tie-breaking votes, a record no successor
   except John C. Calhoun ever threatened. Adams's votes protected the
   President's sole authority over the removal of appointees, influenced
   the location of the national capital, and prevented war with Great
   Britain. On at least one occasion Adams persuaded senators to vote
   against legislation he opposed, and he frequently addressed the Senate
   on procedural and policy matters. Adams's political views and his
   active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of
   George Washington's administration. Toward the end of his first term, a
   threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for
   procedural and policy matters caused him to exercise more restraint in
   hopes of seeing his election as President of the United States.

   In modern times, the Vice President rarely presides over day-to-day
   matters in the Senate; in his place, the Senate chooses a President pro
   tempore (or "president for a time") to preside in the Vice President's
   absence; the Senate normally selects the longest-serving senator in the
   majority party. The President pro tempore has the power to appoint any
   other senator to preside and in practice, junior senators from the
   majority party are assigned the task of presiding over the Senate at
   most times.

   Except for this tie-breaking role, the Standing Rules of the Senate
   vest no significant responsibilities in the Vice President. Rule XIX,
   which governs debate, does not authorize the Vice President to
   participate in debate, and grants only to members of the Senate (and,
   upon appropriate notice, former presidents of the United States) the
   privilege of addressing the Senate, without granting a similar
   privilege to the sitting Vice President. Thus, as Time magazine wrote
   during the controversial tenure of Vice President Charles G. Dawes,
   "once in four years the Vice President can make a little speech, and
   then he is done. For four years he then has to sit in the seat of the
   silent, attending to speeches ponderous or otherwise, of deliberation
   or humor."^[15]

Recurring, infrequent duties[edit]

   The President of the Senate also presides over counting and
   presentation of the votes of the Electoral College. This process occurs
   in the presence of both houses of Congress, generally on January 6 of
   the year following a U.S. presidential election.^[16] In this capacity,
   only four Vice Presidents have been able to announce their own election
   to the presidency: John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Martin Van Buren, and
   George H. W. Bush. At the beginning of 1961, it fell to Richard Nixon
   to preside over this process, which officially announced the election
   of his 1960 opponent, John F. Kennedy. In 2001, Al Gore announced the
   election of his opponent, George W. Bush. In 1969, Vice President
   Hubert Humphrey would have announced the election of his opponent,
   Richard Nixon; however, on the date of the Congressional joint session
   (January 6), Humphrey was in Norway attending the funeral of Trygve
   Lie, the first elected Secretary-General of the United Nations.^[17]

   In 1933, incumbent Vice President Charles Curtis announced the election
   of House Speaker John Nance Garner as his successor, while Garner was
   seated next to him on the House dais.

   The President of the Senate may also preside over most of the
   impeachment trials of federal officers. However, whenever the President
   of the United States is impeached, the US Constitution requires the
   Chief Justice of the United States to preside over the Senate for the
   trial. The Constitution is silent as to the presiding officer in the
   instance where the Vice President is the officer impeached.

Succession and the Twenty-Fifth Amendment[edit]

   John Tyler was the first Vice President to assume the Presidency
   following the death of his predecessor. In doing so, he insisted that
   he was the President, not merely an acting President.

   The U.S. Constitution provides that should the president die or become
   disabled while in office, the "powers and duties" of the office are
   transferred to the Vice President. Initially, it was unclear whether
   the Vice President actually became the new President or merely an
   acting President. This was first tested in 1841 with the death of
   President William Henry Harrison. Harrison's Vice President, John
   Tyler, asserted that he had succeeded to the full Presidential office,
   powers, and title, and declined to acknowledge documents referring to
   him as "Acting President." Despite some strong calls against it, Tyler
   took the oath of office as the tenth President. Tyler's claim was not
   challenged legally, and so the Tyler precedent of full succession was
   established. This was made explicit by Section 1 of the Twenty-fifth
   Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, ratified in 1967.

   Section 2 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment provides for Vice Presidential
   succession:

     Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the
     President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon
     confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.

   Gerald Ford was the first Vice President selected by this method, after
   the resignation of Vice President Spiro Agnew in 1973; after succeeding
   to the Presidency, Ford nominated Nelson Rockefeller as Vice President.

   Another issue was who had the power to declare that an incapacitated
   president is unable to discharge his duties. This question had arisen
   most recently with the illnesses of President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
   Section 3 and Section 4 of the amendment provide means for the Vice
   President to become Acting President upon the temporary disability of
   the president. Section 3 deals with self-declared incapacity of the
   president. Section 4 deals with incapacity declared by the joint action
   of the Vice President and of a majority of the Cabinet.
   President Lyndon Johnson is sworn in following the assassination of
   President John Kennedy.

   While Section 4 has never been invoked, Section 3 has been invoked
   three times: on July 13, 1985 when Ronald Reagan underwent surgery to
   remove cancerous polyps from his colon, and twice more on June 29, 2002
   and July 21, 2007 when George W. Bush underwent colonoscopy procedures
   requiring sedation. Prior to this amendment, Vice President Richard
   Nixon informally replaced President Dwight Eisenhower for several weeks
   on each of three occasions when Eisenhower was ill.

Informal roles[edit]

   The extent of any informal roles and functions of the Vice President
   depend on the specific relationship between the President and the Vice
   President, but often include tasks such as drafter and spokesperson for
   the administration's policies, adviser to the President, and being a
   symbol of American concern or support. The influence of the Vice
   President in this role depends almost entirely on the characteristics
   of the particular administration. Dick Cheney, for instance, was widely
   regarded as one of President George W. Bush's closest confidants. Al
   Gore was an important adviser to President Bill Clinton on matters of
   foreign policy and the environment. Often, Vice Presidents are chosen
   to act as a "balance" to the President, taking either more moderate or
   radical positions on issues. Under the American system the President is
   both head of state and head of government, and the ceremonial duties of
   the former position are often delegated to the Vice President. The Vice
   President may meet with other heads of state or attend state funerals
   in other countries, at times when the administration wishes to
   demonstrate concern or support but cannot send the President himself.
   Not all Vice Presidents are happy in their jobs. John Nance Garner, who
   served as Vice President from 1933 to 1941 under President Franklin D.
   Roosevelt, claimed that the Vice Presidency "isn't worth a pitcher of
   warm piss."^[18]

Office as stepping stone to the Presidency[edit]

   In recent decades, the Vice Presidency has frequently been used to
   launch bids for the Presidency. The transition of the office to its
   modern stature occurred primarily as a result of Franklin Roosevelt's
   1940 nomination, when he captured the ability to nominate his running
   mate instead of leaving the nomination to the convention. Prior to
   that, party bosses often used the Vice Presidential nomination as a
   consolation prize for the party's minority faction. A further factor
   potentially contributing to the rise in prestige of the office was the
   adoption of Presidential preference primaries in the early 20th
   century. By adopting primary voting, the field of candidates for Vice
   President was expanded by both the increased quantity and quality of
   presidential candidates successful in some primaries, yet who
   ultimately failed to capture the Presidential nomination at the
   convention.

   Of the thirteen Presidential elections from 1956 to 2004, nine featured
   the incumbent President; the other four (1960, 1968, 1988, 2000) all
   featured the incumbent Vice President. Former Vice Presidents also ran,
   in 1984 (Walter Mondale), and in 1968 (Richard Nixon, against the
   incumbent Vice President Hubert Humphrey). The first Presidential
   election to include neither the incumbent President nor the incumbent
   Vice President on a major party ticket since 1952 came in 2008 when
   President George W. Bush had already served two terms and Vice
   President Cheney chose not to run. Richard Nixon is also the only
   non-sitting Vice President to be elected President, as well as the only
   person to be elected President and Vice President twice each.

Selection process[edit]

Eligibility[edit]

   John Adams, the first Vice President of the United States

   The Twelfth Amendment states that "no person constitutionally
   ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of
   Vice-President of the United States."^[19] Thus, to serve as Vice
   President, an individual must:
     * Be a natural-born U.S. citizen;
     * Be at least 35 years old
     * Have resided in the U.S. at least 14 years.^[20]

Disqualifications[edit]

   Additionally, Section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment denies eligibility
   for any federal office to anyone who, having sworn an oath to support
   the United States Constitution, later has rebelled against the United
   States. This disqualification, originally aimed at former supporters of
   the Confederacy, may be removed by a two-thirds vote of each house of
   the Congress.

   Under the Twenty-second Amendment, the President of the United States
   may not be elected to more than two terms. However, there is no similar
   such limitation as to how many times one can be elected Vice President.
   Scholars disagree whether a former President barred from election to
   the Presidency is also ineligible to be elected Vice President, as
   suggested by the Twelfth Amendment.^[21]^[22] The issue has never been
   tested in practice.

   Also, Article I, Section 3, Clause 7 allows the Senate, upon voting to
   remove an impeached federal official from office, to disqualify that
   official from holding any federal office.

Residency limitation[edit]

   While it is commonly held that the President and Vice President must be
   residents of different states, this is not actually the case. Nothing
   in the Constitution prohibits both candidates being from a single
   state. Instead, the limitation imposed is on the members of the
   Electoral College, who must cast a ballot for at least one candidate
   who is not from their own state.

   In theory, the candidates elected could both be from one state, but the
   electors of that state would, in a close electoral contest, run the
   risk of denying their vice presidential candidate the absolute majority
   required to secure the election, even if the presidential candidate is
   elected. This would then place the vice presidential election in the
   hands of the Senate.

   In practice, however, residency is rarely an issue. Parties have
   avoided nominating tickets containing two candidates from the same
   state. Further, the candidates may themselves take action to alleviate
   any residency conflict. For example, at the start of the 2000 election
   cycle Dick Cheney was a resident of Texas; Cheney quickly changed his
   residency back to Wyoming, where he had previously served as a U.S.
   Representative, when Texas governor and Republican presidential nominee
   George W. Bush asked Cheney to be his vice presidential candidate.

Nominating process[edit]

   The vice presidential candidates of the major national political
   parties are formally selected by each party's quadrennial nominating
   convention, following the selection of the party's presidential
   candidates. The official process is identical to the one by which the
   presidential candidates are chosen, with delegates placing the names of
   candidates into nomination, followed by a ballot in which candidates
   must receive a majority to secure the party's nomination. In practice,
   the presidential nominee has considerable influence on the decision,
   and in the 20th century it became customary for that person to select a
   preferred running mate, who is then nominated and accepted by the
   convention. In recent years, with the presidential nomination usually
   being a foregone conclusion as the result of the primary process, the
   selection of a vice presidential candidate is often announced prior to
   the actual balloting for the presidential candidate, and sometimes
   before the beginning of the convention itself. The first presidential
   aspirant to announce his selection for Vice President before the
   beginning of the convention was Ronald Reagan who, prior to the 1976
   Republican National Convention announced that Richard Schweiker would
   be his running mate. Reagan's supporters then sought to amend the
   convention rules so that Gerald R. Ford would be required to name his
   vice presidential running mate in advance as well. The proposal was
   defeated, and Reagan did not receive the nomination in 1976. Often, the
   presidential nominee will name a vice presidential candidate who will
   bring geographic or ideological balance to the ticket or appeal to a
   particular constituency. The vice presidential candidate might also be
   chosen on the basis of traits the presidential candidate is perceived
   to lack, or on the basis of name recognition. To foster party unity,
   popular runners-up in the presidential nomination process are commonly
   considered. While this selection process may enhance the chances of
   success for a national ticket, in the past it often insured that the
   vice presidential nominee represented regions, constituencies, or
   ideologies at odds with those of the presidential candidate. As a
   result, vice presidents were often excluded from the policy-making
   process of the new administration. Many times their relationships with
   the president and his staff were aloof, non-existent, or even
   adversarial.

   The ultimate goal of vice presidential candidate selection is to help
   and not hurt the party's chances of getting elected. An overly dynamic
   selection can backfire by outshining the presidential candidate.
   Classic examples of this came in 1988, when Democratic candidate
   Michael Dukakis chose experienced Texas Senator Lloyd Bentsen, and
   2008, when Republican candidate John McCain picked Alaska Governor
   Sarah Palin. However, Palin also hurt McCain in that after interviews
   with Katie Couric, there were concerns about her becoming a political
   liability amid doubts about her fitness to become President should
   McCain be disabled or die.^[23] In these and in other cases the
   selection was seen to have hurt the nominee. In 1984, Walter Mondale
   picked Geraldine Ferraro whose nomination became a drag on the ticket
   due to repeated questions about her husband's finances. Questions about
   Dan Quayle's experience and temperament did not help the 1988
   presidential campaign of George H.W. Bush, but he still won. James
   Stockdale, the choice of third-party candidate Ross Perot in 1992, was
   seen as incompetent by many, but the Perot-Stockdale ticket still won
   about 19% of the vote.

   Historically, vice presidential candidates were chosen to provide
   geographic and ideological balance to a presidential ticket, widening a
   presidential candidate's appeal to voters from outside his regional
   base or wing of the party. Candidates from electoral-vote rich states
   were usually preferred. However, in 1992, moderate Democrat Bill
   Clinton (of Arkansas) chose moderate Democrat Al Gore (of Tennessee) as
   his running mate. Despite the two candidates' near-identical
   ideological and regional backgrounds, Gore's extensive experience in
   national affairs enhanced the appeal of a ticket headed by Clinton,
   whose political career had been spent entirely at the local and state
   levels of government. In 2000, George W. Bush chose Dick Cheney, of
   Wyoming, a reliably Republican state with only three electoral votes.
   In 2008, Barack Obama mirrored Bush's strategy when he chose Joe Biden,
   of Delaware, another reliable state (in this case, Democratic) with
   only three electoral votes. Both Cheney and Biden were chosen for their
   experience in national politics (experience lacked by both Bush and
   Obama) rather than the ideological balance or electoral vote advantage
   they would provide.

   The first Presidential candidate to choose his Vice Presidential
   candidate was President Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1940.^[24] The
   last not to name a Vice Presidential choice, leaving the matter up to
   the convention, was Democrat Adlai Stevenson in 1956. The convention
   chose Tennessee Senator Estes Kefauver over Massachusetts Senator (and
   later president) John F. Kennedy. At the tumultuous 1972 Democratic
   convention, presidential nominee George McGovern selected Senator
   Thomas Eagleton as his running mate, but numerous other candidates were
   either nominated from the floor or received votes during the balloting.
   Eagleton nevertheless received a majority of the votes and the
   nomination, though he later resigned from the ticket, resulting in
   Robert Sargent Shriver becoming McGovern's final running mate; both
   lost to the Nixon-Agnew ticket by a wide margin, carrying only
   Massachusetts and the District of Columbia.

   In cases where the presidential nomination is still in doubt as the
   convention approaches, the campaigns for the two positions may become
   intertwined. In 1976, Ronald Reagan, who was trailing President Gerald
   R. Ford in the presidential delegate count, announced prior to the
   Republican National Convention that, if nominated, he would select
   Senator Richard Schweiker as his running mate. This move backfired to a
   degree, as Schweiker's relatively liberal voting record alienated many
   of the more conservative delegates who were considering a challenge to
   party delegate selection rules to improve Reagan's chances.^[citation
   needed] In the end, Ford narrowly won the presidential nomination and
   Reagan's selection of Schweiker became moot.

Election, oath, and tenure[edit]

   A map of the United States showing the number of electoral votes
   allocated to each state as of the 2000 United States Census. This map
   applied for the 2004 and 2008 elections; it notes that Maine and
   Nebraska distribute electoral by way of the Congressional District
   Method. 270 electoral votes are required for a majority out of 538
   overall.
   Main article: Electoral College (United States)

   Vice Presidents are elected indirectly in the United States. A number
   of electors, collectively known as the Electoral College, officially
   select the President. On Election Day, voters in each of the states and
   the District of Columbia cast ballots for these electors. Each state is
   allocated a number of electors, equal to the size of its delegation in
   both Houses of Congress combined. Generally, the ticket that wins the
   most votes in a state wins all of that state's electoral votes and thus
   has its slate of electors chosen to vote in the Electoral College.

   The winning slate of electors meet at its state's capital on the first
   Monday after the second Wednesday in December, about six weeks after
   the election, to vote. They then send a record of that vote to
   Congress. The vote of the electors is opened by the sitting Vice
   President, acting in his capacity as President of the Senate and read
   aloud to a joint session of the incoming Congress, which was elected at
   the same time as the President.

   Pursuant to the Twentieth Amendment, the Vice President's term of
   office begins at noon on January 20 of the year following the election.
   This date, known as Inauguration Day, marks the beginning of the
   four-year terms of both the President and Vice President.

   Although Article VI requires that the Vice President take an oath or
   affirmation of allegiance to the US Constitution, unlike the President,
   the United States Constitution does not specify the precise wording of
   the oath of office for the Vice President. Several variants of the oath
   have been used since 1789; the current form, which is also recited by
   Senators, Representatives and other government officers, has been used
   since 1884:

     I, A— B—, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
     defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies,
     foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to
     the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental
     reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
     faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to
     enter. So help me God.^[25]

   The term of office for Vice President is four years. While the
   Twenty-Second Amendment generally restricts the President to two terms,
   there is no similar limitation on the office of Vice President, meaning
   an eligible person could hold the office as long as voters continued to
   vote for electors who in turn would renew the Vice President's tenure.
   A Vice President could even serve under different administrations, as
   George Clinton and John C. Calhoun have done.

Original election process and reform[edit]

   Four Vice Presidents: L-R, outgoing Pres. Lyndon B. Johnson (the 37th
   Vice President), incoming Pres. Richard Nixon (36th), Everett Dirksen,
   Spiro Agnew incoming Vice President (39th), and the outgoing Vice
   President Hubert Humphrey (38th), January 20, 1969

   Under the original terms of the Constitution, the electors of the
   Electoral College voted only for office of President rather than for
   both President and Vice President. Each elector was allowed to vote for
   two people for the top office. The person receiving the greatest number
   of votes (provided that such a number was a majority of electors) would
   be President, while the individual who received the next largest number
   of votes became Vice President. If no one received a majority of votes,
   then the House of Representatives would choose among the five
   candidates with the largest numbers of votes, with each state's
   representatives together casting a single vote. In such a case, the
   person who received the highest number of votes but was not chosen
   President would become Vice President. In the case of a tie for second,
   then the Senate would choose the Vice President.^[26]

   The original plan, however, did not foresee the development of
   political parties and their adversarial role in the government. In the
   election of 1796, for instance, Federalist John Adams came in first,
   but because the Federalist electors divided their second vote amongst
   several Vice Presidential candidates, Democratic-Republican Thomas
   Jefferson came second. Thus, the President and Vice President were from
   opposing parties. Predictably, Adams and Jefferson clashed over issues
   such as states' rights and foreign policy.^[27]

   A greater problem occurred in the election of 1800, in which the two
   participating parties each had a secondary candidate they intended to
   elect as Vice President, but the more popular Democratic-Republican
   party failed to execute that plan with their electoral votes. Under the
   system in place at the time (Article II, Section 1, Clause 3), the
   electors could not differentiate between their two candidates, so the
   plan had been for one elector to vote for Thomas Jefferson but not for
   Aaron Burr, thus putting Burr in second place. This plan broke down for
   reasons that are disputed, and both candidates received the same number
   of votes. After 35 deadlocked ballots in the House of Representatives,
   Jefferson finally won on the 36th ballot and Burr became Vice
   President.^[28]

   This tumultuous affair led to the adoption of the Twelfth Amendment in
   1804, which directed the electors to use separate ballots to vote for
   the President and Vice President.^[29] While this solved the problem at
   hand, it ultimately had the effect of lowering the prestige of the Vice
   Presidency, as the office was no longer for the leading challenger for
   the Presidency.

   The separate ballots for President and Vice President became something
   of a moot issue later in the 19th century when it became the norm for
   popular elections to determine a state's Electoral College delegation.
   Electors chosen this way are pledged to vote for a particular
   presidential and vice presidential candidate (offered by the same
   political party). So, while the Constitution says that the President
   and Vice President are chosen separately, in practice they are chosen
   together.

   If no vice presidential candidate receives an Electoral College
   majority, then the Senate selects the Vice President, in accordance
   with the United States Constitution. The Twelfth Amendment states that
   a "majority of the whole number" of Senators (currently 51 of 100) is
   necessary for election.^[30] Further, the language requiring an
   absolute majority of Senate votes precludes the sitting Vice President
   from breaking any tie which might occur.^[31] The election of 1836 is
   the only election so far where the office of the Vice President has
   been decided by the Senate. During the campaign, Martin Van Buren's
   running mate Richard Mentor Johnson was accused of having lived with a
   black woman. Virginia's 23 electors, who were pledged to Van Buren and
   Johnson, refused to vote for Johnson (but still voted for Van Buren).
   The election went to the Senate, where Johnson was elected 33-17.

Salary[edit]

   The Vice President's salary is $230,700.^[32] The salary was set by the
   1989 Government Salary Reform Act, which also provides an automatic
   cost of living adjustment for federal employees.

   The Vice President does not automatically receive a pension based on
   that office, but instead receives the same pension as other members of
   Congress based on his position as president of the Senate.^[33] The
   Vice President must serve a minimum of five years to qualify for a
   pension.^[34]

   Since 1974, the official residence of the Vice President and his family
   has been Number One Observatory Circle, on the grounds of the United
   States Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C.

Vacancy[edit]

   John C. Calhoun was the first Vice President to resign from office.
   See also: Impeachment in the United States, Twenty-fifth Amendment to
   the United States Constitution and List of Vice Presidents of the
   United States

   Article I, Section 2, Clause 5 and Article II, Section 4 of the
   Constitution both authorize the House of Representatives to serve as a
   "grand jury" with the power to impeach high federal officials,
   including the President, for "treason, bribery, or other high crimes
   and misdemeanors." Similarly, Article I, Section 3, Clause 6 and
   Article II, Section 4 both authorize the Senate to serve as a court
   with the power to remove impeached officials from office, given a
   two-thirds vote to convict. No Vice President has ever been impeached;
   in 1973, Spiro Agnew came the closest. Facing the possibility of
   impeachment after federal investigators probed his having allegedly
   received kickbacks from Maryland contractors when he was serving as
   County Executive of Baltimore County, he instead resigned and pleaded
   no contest to a single count of income tax evasion.

   Prior to ratification of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967, no
   provision existed for filling a vacancy in the office of Vice
   President. As a result, the Vice Presidency was left vacant 16
   times—sometimes for nearly four years—until the next ensuing election
   and inauguration: eight times due to the death of the sitting
   president, resulting in the Vice Presidents becoming President; seven
   times due to the death of the sitting Vice President; and once due to
   the resignation of Vice President John C. Calhoun to become a senator.

   Calhoun resigned because he had been dropped from the ticket by
   President Andrew Jackson in favor of Martin Van Buren. Already a lame
   duck Vice President, he was elected to the Senate by the South Carolina
   state legislature and resigned the Vice Presidency early to begin his
   Senate term because he believed he would have more power as a senator.

   Since the adoption of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment, the office has been
   vacant twice while awaiting confirmation of the new Vice President by
   both houses of Congress. The first such instance occurred in 1973
   following the resignation of Spiro Agnew as Richard Nixon's Vice
   President. Gerald Ford was subsequently nominated by President Nixon
   and confirmed by Congress. The second occurred 10 months later when
   Nixon resigned following the Watergate scandal and Ford assumed the
   Presidency. The resulting Vice Presidential vacancy was filled by
   Nelson Rockefeller. Ford and Rockefeller are the only two people to
   have served as Vice President without having been elected to the
   office, and Ford remains the only person to have served as both Vice
   President and President without being elected to either office.

     Once the election is over, the Vice President's usefulness is over.
     He's like the second stage of a rocket. He's damn important going
     into orbit, but he's always thrown off to burn up in the atmosphere.

     — An aide to Vice President Hubert Humphrey.^[35]

   The Twenty-Fifth Amendment also made provisions for a replacement in
   the event that the Vice President died in office, resigned, or
   succeeded to the presidency. The original Constitution had no provision
   for selecting such a replacement, so the office of Vice President would
   remain vacant until the beginning of the next Presidential and Vice
   Presidential terms. This issue had arisen most recently with the John
   F. Kennedy assassination from November 22, 1963, until January 20,
   1965, and was rectified by Section 2 of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment.

Growth of the office[edit]

   “ My country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant
     office that ever the invention of man contrived or his imagination
     conceived.                                                            ”

   —John Adams, to his wife Abigail^[36]
   Though prominent as a Missouri Senator, Harry Truman had been Vice
   President only three months when he became President; he was never
   informed of Franklin Roosevelt's war or postwar policies while Vice
   President.
   Vice President Dick Cheney met with Vice President-elect Joe Biden at
   Number One Observatory Circle on November 13, 2008, representing a
   transition between Vice Presidencies.

   For much of its existence, the office of Vice President was seen as
   little more than a minor position. Adams, the first Vice President, was
   the first of many who found the job frustrating and stupefying.^[36]
   Thomas R. Marshall, the 28th Vice President, lamented: "Once there were
   two brothers. One ran away to sea; the other was elected Vice President
   of the United States. And nothing was heard of either of them
   again."^[37] His successor, Calvin Coolidge, was so obscure that Major
   League Baseball sent him free passes that misspelled his name, and a
   fire marshal failed to recognize him when Coolidge's Washington
   residence was evacuated.^[38] When the Whig Party asked Daniel Webster
   to run for the Vice Presidency on Zachary Taylor's ticket, he replied
   "I do not propose to be buried until I am really dead and in my
   coffin."^[39] This was the second time Webster declined the office,
   which William Henry Harrison had first offered to him. Ironically, both
   of the Presidents making the offer to Webster died in office, meaning
   the three-time Presidential candidate could have become President if he
   had accepted either. Since Presidents rarely died in office, however,
   the better preparation for the Presidency was considered to be the
   office of Secretary of State, in which Webster served under Harrison,
   Tyler, and later, Taylor's successor, Fillmore.

   For many years, the Vice President was given few responsibilities.
   Garret Hobart, the first Vice President under William McKinley, was one
   of the very few Vice Presidents at this time who played an important
   role in the administration. A close confidant and adviser of the
   President, Hobart was called "Assistant President."^[40] However, until
   1919, Vice Presidents were not included in meetings of the President's
   Cabinet. This precedent was broken by President Woodrow Wilson when he
   asked Thomas R. Marshall to preside over Cabinet meetings while Wilson
   was in France negotiating the Treaty of Versailles.^[41] President
   Warren G. Harding also invited his Vice President, Calvin Coolidge, to
   meetings. The next Vice President, Charles G. Dawes, did not seek to
   attend Cabinet meetings under President Coolidge, declaring that "the
   precedent might prove injurious to the country."^[42] Vice President
   Charles Curtis was also precluded from attending by President Herbert
   Hoover.

   In 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt raised the stature of the office by
   renewing the practice of inviting the Vice President to cabinet
   meetings, which every President since has maintained. Roosevelt's first
   Vice President, John Nance Garner, broke with him at the start of the
   second term on the Court-packing issue and became Roosevelt's leading
   political enemy. In 1937, Garner became the first vice president to be
   sworn in on the Capitol steps in the same ceremony with the president,
   a tradition that continues. Prior to that time, vice presidents were
   traditionally inaugurated at a separate ceremony in the Senate chamber.
   Gerald R. Ford and Nelson A. Rockefeller, who were both appointed to
   the office under the terms of the 25th amendment, were inaugurated in
   the House and Senate chambers, respectively.

   Garner's successor, Henry Wallace, was given major responsibilities
   during the war, but he moved further to the left than the Democratic
   Party and the rest of the Roosevelt administration and was relieved of
   actual power. Roosevelt kept his last Vice President, Harry Truman,
   uninformed on all war and postwar issues, such as the atomic bomb,
   leading Truman to remark, wryly, that the job of the Vice President was
   to "go to weddings and funerals." Following Roosevelt's death and
   Truman's ascension to the presidency, the need to keep Vice Presidents
   informed on national security issues became clear, and Congress made
   the Vice President one of four statutory members of the National
   Security Council in 1949.

   Richard Nixon reinvented the office of Vice President. He had the
   attention of the media and the Republican party, when Dwight Eisenhower
   ordered him to preside at Cabinet meetings in his absence. Nixon was
   also the first Vice President to assume temporary control of the
   executive branch, which he did after Eisenhower suffered a heart attack
   on September 24, 1955, ileitis in June 1956, and a stroke in November
   1957.

   Until 1961, vice presidents had their offices on Capitol Hill, a formal
   office in the Capitol itself and a working office in the Russell Senate
   Office Building. Lyndon B. Johnson was the first vice president to be
   given an office in the White House complex, in the Old Executive Office
   Building. The former Navy Secretary's office in the OEOB has since been
   designated the "Ceremonial Office of the Vice President" and is today
   used for formal events and press interviews. President Jimmy Carter was
   the first President to give his vice president, Walter Mondale, an
   office in the West Wing of the White House, which all vice presidents
   have since retained. Because of their function as Presidents of the
   Senate, vice presidents still maintain offices and staff members on
   Capitol Hill.

   Though Walter Mondale's tenure was the beginning of the modern day
   power of the Vice Presidency, the tenure of Dick Cheney saw a rapid
   growth in the office of the Vice President. Vice President Cheney held
   a tremendous amount of power and frequently made policy decisions on
   his own, without the knowledge of the President.^[43] After his tenure,
   and during the 2008 Presidential campaign, both Vice Presidential
   candidates, Sarah Palin and Joe Biden, stated that the office had
   expanded too much under Cheney's tenure and both had planned to reduce
   the role to simply being an adviser to the President.^[44]

Post–Vice Presidency[edit]

   Five former Vice Presidents are currently living:
     * Walter Mondale (D)
       served 1977–1981
     * George H. W. Bush (R)
       served 1981–1989
       Also 41st President (1989-1993)
     * Dan Quayle (R)
       served 1989-1993
     * Al Gore (D)
       served 1993-2001
     * Dick Cheney (R)
       served 2001-2009

   Four vice presidents have been elected to the presidency directly after
   having served as vice president: John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Martin
   Van Buren and George H.W. Bush. Richard M. Nixon, John C. Breckenridge,
   Hubert H. Humphrey and Al Gore were all nominated by their respective
   parties, but failed to succeed the presidents with whom they were
   elected. Some former vice presidents have sought other offices after
   stepping down as vice president. John C. Calhoun resigned as vice
   president to accept election as US Senator from South Carolina.
   Hannibal Hamlin, Andrew Johnson, and Alben Barkley were all re-elected
   to the Senate after leaving office, as was Hubert H. Humphrey in 1970.
   Levi P. Morton, vice president under Benjamin Harrison, was elected
   Governor of New York after leaving office.

   Two vice presidents served under different presidents. George Clinton
   served under both Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, while John C.
   Calhoun served under John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson. In the
   modern era, Adlai Stevenson I became the first vice president to seek
   re-election with a different running mate, running in 1900 with William
   Jennings Bryan after serving under Bryan's rival, Grover Cleveland. He
   was also narrowly defeated for Governor of Illinois in 1908. Charles
   Warren Fairbanks, vice president under Theodore Roosevelt, sought
   unsuccessfully to return to office as Charles Evans Hughes' running
   mate in 1916.

   Richard M. Nixon unsuccessfully sought the governorship of California
   in 1962, two years after leaving office as vice president and six years
   before winning the presidency. Walter Mondale ran unsuccessfully for
   president in 1984, served as U.S. Ambassador to Japan from 1993 to
   1996, and then sought unsuccessfully to return to the Senate in 2002.
   George H. W. Bush won the presidency, and his Vice President, Dan
   Quayle, briefly sought the Republican nomination in 2000. Al Gore also
   ran for the Presidency in 2000. Following his unsuccessful run for the
   Presidency, Gore became very active in issues relating to the
   environment, and vigorously fights for the recognition of global
   warming and climate change. Cheney had previously explored the
   possibility of running for President before serving as Vice President,
   but chose not to run for President after his two terms as Vice
   President. Following his tenure, he has been very critical of the Obama
   administration, especially its treatment of terror detainees, which was
   something that Cheney had great authority and experience over
   throughout his tenure.

   Since 1977, former presidents and vice presidents who are elected or
   re-elected to the Senate are entitled to the largely honorific position
   of Deputy President pro tempore. So far, the only former vice president
   to have held this title is Hubert H. Humphrey following his return to
   the Senate. Walter Mondale would have been entitled to the position had
   his 2002 Senate bid been successful.

   Under the terms of an 1886 Senate resolution, all former vice
   presidents are entitled to a portrait bust in the Senate wing of the
   United States Capitol, commemorating their service as presidents of the
   Senate. Dan Quayle is the most recent former vice president to be so
   honored.

   Former Vice Presidents are eligible for pensions, and have been
   entitled to Secret Service personal protection since 2008.^[45] Former
   Vice Presidents traditionally receive Secret Service protection for up
   to six months after leaving office, by order of the Secretary of
   Homeland Security.^[46] In 2008, a bill titled the "Former Vice
   President Protection Act" was passed by Congress and signed into law by
   President Bush.^[47] It provides six-month Secret Service protection by
   law to a former Vice President and family. According to the Department
   of Homeland Security, protection for former Vice President Cheney has
   been extended numerous times because threats against him have not
   decreased since his leaving office.^[48]

Timeline of Vice Presidents[edit]

   This is a graphical timeline listing of the Vice Presidents of the
   United States.

   [USEMAP:4d6fd01fbd38ab0f6774b310aa230598.png]

See also[edit]

   Portal icon Government of the United States portal
     * List of Vice Presidents of the United States
     * List of Vice Presidents of the United States by age
     * Office of the Vice President of the United States

Notes and references[edit]

    1. ^ U.S. Const. art. II, § 1, cl. 1.
    2. ^
       https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/generic/VP_Mill
       ard_Fillmore.htm
    3. ^ ^a ^b U.S. Const. amend. XII, § 1.
    4. ^ U.S. Const. amend. XXV, § 1.
    5. ^ ^a ^b U.S. Const. art. I, § 3, cl. 4.
    6. ^ "U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home > Votes > Roll Call
       Vote". Senate.gov. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
    7. ^ Oleszek, Walter J. CRS7-5700 Super-Majority Votes in the Senate
       Congressional Research Service, April 12, 2010
    8. ^ ^a ^b Goldstein, Joel K. (1995). "The New Constitutional Vice
       Presidency". Wake Forest Law Review (Winston Salem, NC: Wake Forest
       Law Review Association, Inc.) 30: 505.
    9. ^ Reynolds, Glenn Harlan (2007). "Is Dick Cheney
       Unconstitutional?". Northwestern University Law Review Colloquy
       (Chicago: Northwestern University School of Law) 102: 110.
   10. ^ Garvey, Todd (2008). "A Constitutional Anomaly: Safeguarding
       Confidential National Security Information Within the Enigma That
       Is the American Vice Presidency". William & Mary Bill of Rights
       Journal (Williamsburg: Publications Council of the College of
       William and Mary) 17: 565.
   11. ^ Subhawong, Aryn (2008). "A Realistic Look at the Vice Presidency:
       Why Dick Cheney Is An "Entity Within the Executive Branch"". Saint
       Louis University Law Journal (Saint Louis: Saint Louis University
       School of Law) 53: 281.
   12. ^ ^a ^b Albert, Richard (2005). "The Evolving Vice Presidency".
       Temple Law Review (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University of the
       Commonwealth System of Higher Education) 78: 811, at 816–19.
   13. ^ 50 U.S.C. § 402
   14. ^ 20 U.S.C. § 42
   15. ^ "President Dawes," Time Magazine, December 14, 1924.
   16. ^ 3 U.S.C. § 15
   17. ^ "St. Petersburg Times, January 7, 1969, p.6-A". News.google.com.
       January 7, 1969. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
   18. ^ "John Nance Garner quotes". Retrieved August 25, 2008.
   19. ^ "U.S. Const., amend. XII".
   20. ^ See: U.S. Const. art. II, §1, cl. 5; see also, U.S. Const. amend.
       XII, §4.
   21. ^ See: Peabody, Bruce G.; Gant, Scott E. (1999). "The Twice and
       Future President: Constitutional Interstices and the Twenty-Second
       Amendment". Minnesota Law Review (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Law
       Review) 83: 565.
   22. ^ See: Albert, Richard (2005). "The Evolving Vice Presidency".
       Temple Law Review (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University of the
       Commonwealth System of Higher Education) 78: 811, at 856–59.
   23. ^ Nagourney, Adam (September 30, 2008). "Concerns About Palin’s
       Readiness as Big Test Nears". New York Times. p. A16. Retrieved
       April 9, 2011.
   24. ^ The "Veepstakes": Strategic Choice in Presidential Running Mate
       Selection, by Lee Sigelman and Paul J. Wahlbeck, American Political
       Science Review, December 1997
   25. ^ See: 5 U.S.C. § 3331; see also: Standing Rules of the Senate:
       Rule III
   26. ^ "Constitution of the United States of America". Federal
       Constitutional Convention. September 17, 1787. Retrieved June 5,
       2008.
   27. ^ Electoral College Box Scores 1789–1996. Official website of the
       National Archives. (July 30, 2005).
   28. ^ Electoral College Box Scores 1789–1996. Official website of the
       National Archives. (July 30, 2005).
   29. ^ "Constitution of the United States of America Amendment XII".
       U.S. National Government. June 15, 1804. Retrieved June 5, 2008.
   30. ^ "RL30804: The Electoral College: An Overview and Analysis of
       Reform Proposals, L. Paige Whitaker and Thomas H. Neale, January
       16, 2001". Ncseonline.org. Archived from the original on June 28,
       2011. Retrieved August 26, 2010.
   31. ^ Longley, Lawrence D.; Pierce, Neal R. (1999). The Electoral
       College Primer 2000. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. p. 13.
   32. ^ "Current salary information". Usgovinfo.about.com. Retrieved
       March 13, 2011.
   33. ^ http://www.senate.gov/reference/resources/pdf/RL30631.pdf
   34. ^ Emily Yoffe (January 3, 2001). "Pension information". Slate.com.
       Retrieved August 9, 2009.
   35. ^ Quoted by Light 1984 cited in Sigelman and Wahlbeck 1997. JSTOR
   36. ^ ^a ^b "John Adams". Retrieved August 9, 2011.
   37. ^ "A heartbeat away from the presidency: vice presidential trivia".
       Case Western Reserve University. October 4, 2004. Retrieved
       September 12, 2008.
   38. ^ Greenberg, David (2007). Calvin Coolidge. Macmillan. pp. 40–41.
       ISBN 0-8050-6957-7.
   39. ^ Binkley, Wilfred Ellsworth; Moos, Malcolm Charles (1949). A
       Grammar of American Politics: The National Government. New York:
       Alfred A. Knopf. p. 265.
   40. ^ "Garret Hobart". Retrieved August 25, 2008.
   41. ^ Harold C. Relyea (February 13, 2001). "The Vice Presidency:
       Evolution of the Modern Office, 1933–2001". Congressional Research
       Service.
   42. ^ "U.S. Senate Web page on Charles G. Dawes, 30th Vice President
       (1925–1929)". Senate.gov. Retrieved August 9, 2009.
   43. ^ Kenneth T. Walsh (October 3, 2003). "Dick Cheney is the most
       powerful vice president in history. Is that good?". U.S. News and
       World Report. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
   44. ^ "Full Vice Presidential Debate with Gov. Palin and Sen. Biden".
       YouTube. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
   45. ^ "Internet Public Library: FARQs". Retrieved August 25, 2008.
   46. ^ "LARRY KING LIVE: Interview with Al, Tipper Gore". CNN. Retrieved
       August 25, 2008.
   47. ^ "Former Vice President Protection Act of 2008". Opencongress.org.
       Retrieved August 9, 2009.
   48. ^ "President Barack Obama authorizes extended Secret Service guard
       for former VP Dick Cheney". Daily News (New York). July 21, 2009.

Further reading[edit]

     * Goldstein, Joel K. (1982). The Modern American Vice Presidency.
       Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-02208-9.
     * Tally, Steve (1992). Bland Ambition: From Adams to Quayle—The
       Cranks, Criminals, Tax Cheats, and Golfers Who Made It to Vice
       President. Harcourt. ISBN 0-15-613140-4.

External links[edit]

   Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vice President of the United
   States.
     * White House website for the Vice President
     * Vice-President Elect Chester Arthur on Expectations of VP Shapell
       Manuscript Foundation
     * A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787–1825

           United States presidential line of succession
   Preceded by
   None       1st in line              Succeeded by
                          Speaker of the House of Representatives

            * v
     * t
     * e

   Vice Presidents of the United States
    1. John Adams
    2. Thomas Jefferson
    3. Aaron Burr
    4. George Clinton
    5. Elbridge Gerry
    6. Daniel D. Tompkins
    7. John C. Calhoun
    8. Martin Van Buren
    9. Richard Mentor Johnson
   10. John Tyler
   11. George M. Dallas
   12. Millard Fillmore
   13. William R. King
   14. John C. Breckinridge
   15. Hannibal Hamlin
   16. Andrew Johnson
   17. Schuyler Colfax
   18. Henry Wilson
   19. William A. Wheeler
   20. Chester A. Arthur
   21. Thomas A. Hendricks
   22. Levi P. Morton
   23. Adlai Stevenson I
   24. Garret Hobart
   25. Theodore Roosevelt
   26. Charles W. Fairbanks
   27. James S. Sherman
   28. Thomas R. Marshall
   29. Calvin Coolidge
   30. Charles G. Dawes
   31. Charles Curtis
   32. John Nance Garner
   33. Henry A. Wallace
   34. Harry S. Truman
   35. Alben W. Barkley
   36. Richard Nixon
   37. Lyndon B. Johnson
   38. Hubert Humphrey
   39. Spiro Agnew
   40. Gerald Ford
   41. Nelson Rockefeller
   42. Walter Mondale
   43. George H. W. Bush
   44. Dan Quayle
   45. Al Gore
   46. Dick Cheney
   47. Joe Biden

                             US Vice President Seal.svg

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Lists related to the Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United
   States
   Presidents
     * Age
     * Autobiographies
     * Birth
     * Burial
     * Death
     * Historical rankings
     * Military rank
     * Military service
     * Net worth
     * Number living
     * Time in office
     * Timeline

   Professional careers
     * Assassination attempts and plots
     * Campaign slogans
     * Control of Congress
     * Doctrines
     * Inaugurations
     * International trips
     * Judicial appointments
     * Libraries
     * Other offices held
     * Pardons
     * Political affiliation
     * Previous experience
     * Vetoes

   Personal life
     * Deaths in office
     * Education
     * Facial hair
     * Handedness
     * Multilingualism
     * Names
     * Nicknames
     * Pets
     * Home state
     * Previous occupation
     * Religious affiliation
     * Residences
     * Summer White Houses

   Vice presidents
     * Age
     * Education
     * Other offices held
     * Place of primary affiliation
     * Religious affiliation
     * Tie-breaking votes
     * Time in office
     * Vacancies

   Succession
     * Designated survivor
     * Line of succession

   Elections
     * Electoral College margin
     * Popular vote margin

   Candidates
     * Democratic tickets
     * Republican tickets
     * Third party tickets
     * African American
     * Candidates with at least one electoral vote
     * Female
     * Former presidents who ran again
     * Height
     * Lost their home state

   Families
     * First Family
     * First ladies
          + list
          + number living
     * Second ladies
     * Children
     * Relatives

   Namesakes, honors
     * U.S. postage stamp appearances
     * Currency appearances
     * U.S. county names

   In fiction
     * Presidents
     * Vice Presidents
     * Candidates
     * Line of succession


                    * v
     * t
     * e

   United States presidential elections
     * 1788–89
     * 1792
     * 1796
     * 1800
     * 1804
     * 1808
     * 1812
     * 1816
     * 1820
     * 1824
     * 1828
     * 1832
     * 1836
     * 1840
     * 1844
     * 1848
     * 1852
     * 1856
     * 1860
     * 1864
     * 1868
     * 1872
     * 1876
     * 1880
     * 1884
     * 1888
     * 1892
     * 1896
     * 1900
     * 1904
     * 1908
     * 1912
     * 1916
     * 1920
     * 1924
     * 1928
     * 1932
     * 1936
     * 1940
     * 1944
     * 1948
     * 1952
     * 1956
     * 1960
     * 1964
     * 1968
     * 1972
     * 1976
     * 1980
     * 1984
     * 1988
     * 1992
     * 1996
     * 2000
     * 2004
     * 2008
     * 2012
     * 2016
     __________________________________________________________________

     * Electoral College
     * Electoral vote changes
     * Electoral votes by state
     * Results by Electoral College margin
     * Results by popular vote margin
     * Results by state
     * Voter turnout
     * Presidential primaries
     * Presidential nominating conventions
     * Election debates

   See also
          House elections
          Senate elections
          Gubernatorial elections


     * v
     * t
     * e

   United States topics
   History

   Timeline
              * Pre-Columbian era
              * Colonial era
                   + Thirteen Colonies
                   + Military history
                   + Continental Congress
              * American Revolution
                   + War
              * American frontier
              * Federalist Era
              * War of 1812
              * Territorial acquisitions
              * Territorial evolution
              * Mexican–American War
              * Civil War
              * Reconstruction Era
              * Indian Wars
              * Gilded Age
              * Progressive Era
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954)
              * Spanish–American War
              * Imperialism
              * World War I
              * Roaring Twenties
              * Great Depression
              * World War II
                   + Home front
              * Cold War
              * Korean War
              * Space Race
              * African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
              * Feminist Movement
              * Vietnam War
              * Post-Cold War (1991–present)
              * War on Terror
                   + War in Afghanistan
                   + Iraq War
              * Timeline of modern American conservatism

   By topic
              * Demographic
              * Discoveries
              * Economic
                   + Debt ceiling
              * Inventions
                   + before 1890
                   + 1890–1945
                   + 1946–91
                   + after 1991
              * Military
              * Postal
              * Technological and industrial

   Geography

     * Cities, towns, and villages
     * Counties
     * Extreme points
     * Islands
     * Mountains
          + Peaks
          + Appalachian
          + Rocky
     * National Park System
     * Regions
          + West Coast
          + East Coast
          + Great Plains
          + Mid-Atlantic
          + Midwestern
          + New England
          + Northwestern
          + Northeastern
          + Southwestern
          + Southeastern
          + Western
          + Eastern
          + Northern
          + Southern
          + Pacific
     * Rivers
          + Colorado
          + Columbia
          + Mississippi
          + Missouri
          + Ohio
          + Rio Grande
     * States
     * Territory
     * Water supply and sanitation

   Politics


   Federal

            Executive
                          * President
                               + Executive Office
                          * Cabinet / Executive departments
                          * Civil service
                          * Independent agencies
                          * Law enforcement
                          * Public policy

           Legislature
                          * Congress
                               + Senate
                                    o Vice President
                                    o President pro tem
                               + House of Representatives
                                    o Speaker

            Judiciary
                          * Supreme Court
                          * Federal judiciary
                          * Courts of appeals
                          * District courts

               Law
                          * Constitution
                               + Federalism
                               + Preemption
                               + Separation of powers
                          * Bill of Rights
                               + Civil liberties
                          * Code of Federal Regulations
                          * Federal Reporter
                          * United States Code
                          * United States Reports

           Intelligence
                          * Central Intelligence Agency
                          * Defense Intelligence Agency
                          * National Security Agency
                          * Federal Bureau of Investigation

            Uniformed
                          * Armed Forces
                               + Air Force
                               + Army
                               + Marine Corps
                               + Navy
                               + National Guard
                               + Coast Guard
                          * NOAA Corps
                          * Public Health Service Corps

     * Administrative divisions
     * Elections
          + Electoral College
     * Foreign policy
     * Foreign relations
     * Ideologies
     * Local governments
     * Parties
          + Democratic Party
          + Republican Party
          + Third parties
     * 51st state
          + Political status of Puerto Rico
     * Red states and blue states
          + Purple America
     * Scandals
     * State governments
     * Uncle Sam

   Economy
     * Economic issues
     * Agriculture
     * Banking
     * Communications
     * Companies
          + by state
     * Dollar (currency)
     * Energy
     * Federal Budget
     * Federal Reserve System
     * Financial position
     * Insurance
     * Labor unions
     * Mining
     * Public debt
     * Social welfare programs
     * Taxation
     * Tourism
     * Trade
     * Transportation
     * Unemployment
     * Wall Street

   Society

     Culture
                  * Architecture
                  * Art
                  * Cinema
                  * Crime
                  * Cuisine
                  * Dance
                  * Demographics
                  * Education
                  * Family structure
                  * Fashion
                  * Flag
                  * Folklore
                  * Health care
                  * Health insurance
                  * Incarceration
                  * Languages
                       + American English
                       + Spanish
                       + French
                       + German
                       + Italian
                  * Literature
                  * Media
                  * Music
                  * Names
                  * People
                  * Philosophy
                  * Public holidays
                  * Radio
                  * Religion
                  * Sports
                  * Television
                  * Theater

   Social class
                  * Affluence
                  * American Dream
                  * Educational attainment
                  * Homelessness
                  * Homeownership
                  * Household income
                  * Income inequality
                  * Middle class
                  * Personal income
                  * Poverty
                  * Professional and working class conflict
                  * Standard of living
                  * Smoking
                  * Wealth

      Issues
                  * Abortion
                  * Affirmative action
                  * Anti-Americanism
                  * Capital punishment
                  * Criticism
                  * Discrimination
                  * Drug policy
                  * Energy policy
                  * Environmental movement
                  * Exceptionalism
                  * Gun politics
                  * Health care reform
                  * Human rights
                  * Immigration
                  * Illegal Immigration
                  * International rankings
                  * LGBT rights
                       + Same-sex marriage
                  * Nationalism
                  * Obesity
                  * Racism
                  * Separation of church and state
                  * Terrorism

     * Outline
     * Index

     * Book
     * Category
     * Portal
     * WikiProject

   Retrieved from
   "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vice_President_of_the_United
   _States&oldid=624218568"
   Categories:
     * Vice Presidency of the United States
     * Legislative speakers
     * Vice presidents

   Hidden categories:
     * Use mdy dates from November 2013
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2007

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

Variants

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

More

Search

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Featured content
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * Donate to Wikipedia
     * Wikimedia Shop

Interaction

     * Help
     * About Wikipedia
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Contact page

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Wikidata item
     * Cite this page

Print/export

     * Create a book
     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * العربية
     * Aragonés
     * Azərbaycanca
     * Беларуская
     * Bikol Central
     * Български
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Cymraeg
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 한국어
     * Hrvatski
     * Ilokano
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Íslenska
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * Basa Jawa
     * ಕನ್ನಡ
     * ქართული
     * Latina
     * Latviešu
     * مصرى
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Scots
     * Simple English
     * Slovenščina
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * ไทย
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * Winaray
     * 中文
     *

   Edit links

     * This page was last modified on 4 September 2014 at 22:58.
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree
       to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
       trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
       organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Developers
     * Mobile view

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
